Methods
   
      Plant and insect materials
      The wheat cultivars Newton and Molly were used in this study. Newton is a susceptible
         cultivar containing no Hessian fly resistance gene. Molly is a nearly-isogenic offspring
         line of Newton and contains the R gene H13. Molly was obtained via backcrossing for seven generations to the susceptible parent
         Newton [47]. A Hessian fly population from Scott County, Kansas, was used for this research.
         The fly population is virulent to Newton wheat, but avirulent to Molly, which contains
         the resistance gene H13[58].
      
      Experimental treatments and RNA extraction
      Molly and Newton seedlings were grown and infested with biotype GP in a growth chamber
         set at 20 ± 1°C (daytime) and 18 ± 1°C (night) with a 14:10&nbsp;h (L/D) photoperiod. Seedlings
         were infested at two-leaf stage with eggs from 20 mated females per 10 plants. Tissue
         samples from 5 plants in each replicate were collected and pooled at 6, 12, 24, and
         72&nbsp;h after larval hatching. Only the tissue at the feeding site (about 1.5 to 2&nbsp;cm)
         of the second leaf sheath was collected for RNA extraction. Seedlings of each genotype
         under the same conditions but without infestation were used as uninfested control.
         A portion of the seedlings in each experiment was kept for later phenotypic confirmation.
         Total RNA was extracted from wheat tissues using TRI reagent™ according to the procedure
         provided by the manufacturer (Molecular Research Center, Inc., Cincinnati, OH, USA).
         Three biological replications were used for each treatment.
      
      Microarray hybridization and data analysis
      GeneChip® wheat genome arrays containing 61,127 probesets were purchased from Affymetrix (Santa
         Clara, CA, USA). Each data point contains three biological replicates. Labeling and
         hybridization on the wheat microarrays were performed according to the standard protocol
         provided by Affymetrix (http://www.affymetrix.com/support/technical/manual/expression_manual.affx webcite). After hybridization and washing, the arrays were scanned with an Affymetrix GeneChip
         Scanner 3000. Gene annotation was accomplished using HarvEST: Wheat version 1.57 (http://www.harvest.ucr.edu/ webcite) and Affymetrix NetAffx. The functions of the genes were further manually updated
         by searching the GenBank with BLASTX. Microarray data were deposited to the data base
         of National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) with accession number GSE34445
         (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE34445 webcite).
      
      Statistical analysis
      The microarray probe-level intensity was read from cel files directly. The probe-level
         data from multiple chips were then summarized with GC Robust Multi-array Average (GCRMA)
         [59] to produce probeset expression values. GCRMA uses probe affinity data including perfect
         match, mismatch probes and sequence information to perform background adjustment,
         quantile normalization, and median-polish summarization.
      
      Differentially expressed genes were identified by using LIMMA method. Specifically,
         the effects of interest were coded into contrast parameters and linear models were
         fitted to estimate the contrast parameters. The log-odds of differential expression
         versus no differential expression and the moderated t-statistics were calculated by
         empirical Bayes shrinkage of the standard errors towards a pooled standard deviation
         value. Differentially expressed genes were selected at 0.05 significant level with
         BH adjustment for multiple comparisons [60,61].
      
      Real-time PCR validation and correlation Analysis
      Real-time PCR (qPCR) was carried with six representative genes for validation of microarray
         results. Actin was used for normalization. Total RNA was treated with TURBO™ DNase
         (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) to remove any genomic DNA contamination. One microgram of
         total RNA was used for synthesis of first strand cDNA using SuperScript® III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and used as a
         template for real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). Three biological replications, each
         with two technical replications were used for qPCR analysis. PCR primers were designed
         using Beacon Designer software (version 7) and listed in Additional file 10: Table S7. qPCR was performed using SYBR green kit (Bio-Rad) and Bio-Rad iCycler
         iQs real-time PCR detection system at the Kansas State University Gene Expression
         Facility. qPCR cycling parameters included 95°C for 5&nbsp;min, 40&nbsp;cycles each consisting
         of 95°C for 30&nbsp;sec, 52°C for 15&nbsp;sec, and 72°C for 45&nbsp;sec. At the end of each PCR reaction,
         a melt curve was generated to confirm single peak and rule out the possibility of
         primer-dimer and non-specific product formation. Relative fold-changes for transcripts
         were calculated using the comparative 2−ΔΔCT method [62]. Log2 ratios were used to perform the correlation analysis between qPCR and microarray
         data.
      
      Additional file 10: Table S7. Target genes and primer pairs used for real-time PCR (qPCR).
         	Format: DOC 
         	Size: 38KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Word Viewer
      qPCR results are shown in Additional file 9: Figure S3A. The results were highly consistent with microarray results, with a correlation
         coefficient 0.95 (Additional file 9: Figure S3B).
      
      Hessian fly larvae rescue assay
      Initial infestation was carried out with Molly plants as described above. Larval hatching
         and migration were monitored hourly starting three days after infestation to accurately
         determine the time when larvae reached the feeding site [36]. After larvae lived in resistant Molly plants for one or two days, seedlings were
         dissected, larvae in the plants were washed off into water with 0.1% Tween20. The
         washed off larvae were individually replaced back onto the first leaf-blade of a fresh
         seedling of the susceptible Newton. Survival rate of the rescued larvae was determined
         two weeks later when larvae became third instar. For control, larvae lived in susceptible
         Newton seedlings for one or two days were collected and transferred onto new Newton
         seedlings in exactly the same way as in Molly. Five replicates were carried out and
         each replicate consisted of 10 plants with average rescued larvae 20–30 per replicate.
         Data were analyzed using a standard ANOVA analysis.
      
      Metabolite profiling
      Metabolite profiling was conducted by a commercial service with Metabolon (Durham,
         NC, http://www.metabolon.com/ webcite). The analysis was conducted as described previously [63]. Briefly, wheat tissues were processed using the automated MicroLab STAR® system from Hamilton Company (Reno, NV, USA). Recovery standards were added prior
         to the first step in the extraction process for quality control purposes. Sample preparation
         was conducted using a proprietary series of organic and aqueous extractions to remove
         the protein fraction while allowing maximum recovery of small molecules. The resulting
         extract was divided into two fractions; one for analysis by liquid chromatography
         (LC) and the other for analysis by gas chromatography (GC). Samples were placed briefly
         on a TurboVap® (Zymark) to remove the organic solvent. Each sample was then frozen and vacuum dried.
         Samples were then subjected to mass spectrometry (MS), either LC/MS or GC/MS.
      
      LC/MS analysis was conducted on a platform based on a Waters ACQUITY UPLC and a Thermo-Finnigan
         LTQ mass spectrometer, which consisted of an electrospray ionization (ESI) source
         and a linear ion-trap (LIT) mass analyzer. Plant extract was split into two aliquots,
         dried, then reconstituted in acidic or basic LC-compatible solvents, each of which
         contained 11 or more injection standards at fixed concentrations. One aliquot was
         analyzed using acidic positive ion optimized conditions and the other using basic
         negative ion optimized conditions in two independent injections using separate dedicated
         columns. Extracts reconstituted in acidic conditions were gradient eluted using water
         and methanol both containing 0.1% Formic acid, while the basic extracts, which also
         used water/methanol, contained 6.5&nbsp;mM ammonium bicarbonate. The MS analysis alternated
         between MS and data-dependent MS2 scans using dynamic exclusion.
      
      The samples destined for GC/MS analysis were re-dried under vacuum desiccation for
         a minimum of 24&nbsp;hours prior to being derivatized under dried nitrogen using bistrimethyl-silyl-triflouroacetamide
         (BSTFA). The GC column was 5% phenyl and the temperature ramp is from 40° to 300°C
         in a 16&nbsp;minute period. Samples were analyzed on a Thermo-Finnigan Trace DSQ (Fisher
         scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) fast-scanning single-quadrupole mass spectrometer using
         electron impact ionization.
      
      Data were collected and analyzed using an informatics system. Compounds were identified
         by comparison to library entries of purified standards or recurrent unknown entities.
         Identification of known chemical entities was based on comparison to metabolomic library
         entries of purified standards, which consisted of over 1000 commercially available
         purified standard compounds. The combination of chromatographic properties and mass
         spectra gave an indication of a match to the specific compound or an isobaric entity.
         A variety of curation procedures were carried out to ensure that a high quality data
         set was made available for statistical analysis and data interpretation.
      
      t-tests were conducted to determine whether the unknown means for two populations are
         different or not. “Mean Decrease Accuracy” (MDA) is used to determine which variables
         (biochemicals) make the largest contribution to a classification. MDA is determined
         by randomly permuting a variable, running the observed values through the trees, and
         then reassessing the prediction accuracy. Thus, the random forest analysis provides
         an “importance” rank ordering of biochemicals; we typically output the top 30 biochemicals
         in the list as potentially worthy of further investigation.
      
      Epidermal cell permeability assay
      Neutral red stain (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was used to determine epidermal
         permeability of cells as described previously [35,36]. Briefly, plants were dissected 2&nbsp;days after the initial HF larval attack. After
         peeling off the first leaf-sheath, the HF larval feeding site of the second leaf-sheath
         was stained with 0.1% neutral red stain for 10&nbsp;min, followed by five times washing
         with water. Uninfested plants were dissected and stained as negative controls in the
         same way. After staining, plant tissues were examined under a fluorescent microscope
         (Zeiss Axioplan-2) and photographed with a Nikon Coolpix 4500 Digital camera.
      
   

