Methods
   
      Sample selection
      Funded by the US Agency for International Development (USAID), DHS has conducted national
         household surveys on health-related issues in more than 90 countries since 1984. The
         Kenya 2008-2009 DHS surveyed women aged 15 to 49 in selected households. In every
         second selected household, women were offered voluntary HIV testing [34], p. 8. Of the 4,418 women eligible for HIV testing, 8.2% refused to provide blood
         and 3.5% were not interviewed or were absent from the blood collection [34], p.212. One woman per household was selected to participate in a domestic violence
         module. Questions on IPV were administered to women completing the domestic violence
         module who had ever had an intimate partner, with questions asked about either the
         current or most recent partner [34], p. 254. Our sample for this study is women who are: currently married or living
         with someone, completed the IPV questions, and obtained HIV testing.
      
      Women participating in the DHS survey gave their informed consent before data collection
         and before giving blood for HIV testing [34]. For the domestic violence survey, privacy was ensured before the interview was conducted
         [34]. The blood collection and analysis was based on a protocol developed by the DHS and
         revised and approved by the Scientific and Ethical Review Committee of the Kenya Medical
         Research Institute, and the National AIDS Control Council [34]. Permission for using the data for this study was authorized by ICF International,
         which coordinates the DHS.
      
      Measures
      There were 12 IPV questions in the DHS IPV survey questionnaire, grouped into four
         IPV types: psychological, severe physical, less severe physical and sexual. The participants
         were asked if they had ever experienced any of these, and if so, about frequency in
         the last 12 months. Dried blood spots were collected during the survey and tested
         for HIV using ELISA (see [34], p. 10).
      
      Basic sociodemographic factors analyzed in this study were those commonly considered
         in the aformentioned studies, and included age, education, working status (whether
         respondents are currently working), religion, geographic residence (urban/rural),
         wealth and age gap between the respondents and their male partners [13,20,24,25,27-29,33,36-40]. On the basis of theoretical considerations and previous research [23-28,41-46] (though limited by the data collected), we also selected certain HIV risk factors
         a priori to assess: partner’s alcohol consumption, condom use at last sex, partner’s number
         of other wives, respondent’s of sex partners with the last 12 months and in lifetime.
         In addition, location (cluster ID and province) and ethnicity were treated as random
         effects to properly control for correlations between people from the same geographic
         area and ethnicity. Women who reported no sexual activity within the preceding 12
         months were not asked about condom use; we coded these women as “not asked” rather
         than excluding them from the study.
      
      Statistical analysis
      We used generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) to examine the association between
         IPV and HIV infection. The GLMM framework allows us to model a binary response variable
         (HIV test result), and to take random effects (location and ethnicity) into account.
         To simplify interpretation and to account for relationships between predictors, we
         assessed all the selected sociodemographic variables with the IPV predictor together
         in a single GLMM. Given theoretical and empirical uncertainty about whether HIV risk
         factors may mediate and/or confound the association between IPV and HIV, we included
         HIV risk factors in a model with sociodemographic variables to see whether and how
         they affected the magnitude of association between IPV and HIV, without presupposing
         which of these roles they might have.
      
      To construct a simple model, we combined the 12 IPV questions (see Table 1) by converting responses into scores (see Table 2), and used the first principal component from a scaled, uncentered principal components
         analysis (PCA) as an index to describe the overall IPV experience of each woman, using
         a single variable.
      
      Table 1. Responses to IPV questions
      Table 2. Sociodemographic breakdown of HIV prevalence and IPV scores
      We made an a priori decision to model wealth effects using a three-knot spline, and age effects using
         a four-knot spline.
      
      In a follow-up model, we constructed a separate PCA index for each of the four DHS
         categories of IPV, using the same methodology as we used for the overall index.
      
      Variable-level p values were calculated by sequentially dropping each variable and
         comparing the restricted models to the original model.
      
      Scripts
      We are not able to make our data available, but researchers can request them from
         DHS. All of the R scripts use to analyze the data and produce the figures are available
         for download at http://lalashan.mcmaster.ca/theobio/Kenya_IPV_risk/ webcite.
      
   

