Methods
   
      Patients
      Eighty one adult patients (52 male, mean age 59.8 years, range 22–86 years) on chronic
         maintenance HD for at least three months (mean HD duration 66 months, range 3–274
         months) were included in the study. All patients were from the Dialysis Unit of the
         University Department of Nephrology at “Hippokration” General Hospital who consented
         to the protocol and entered the study consecutively. Chronic renal failure was attributed
         to glomerulonephritis in 21 cases (25.9%), diabetes mellitus in 17 (21%), tubulointerstitial
         nephritis in 10 (12.3%), polycystic kidney disease in 8 (10.0%), renovascular hypertension
         in 7 (8.6%), and was undetermined in 18 cases (22.2%). Patients were clinically stable
         without active malignancy, infection, or liver disease. None of the patients was receiving
         antibiotics or immunosuppressive agents and none had a history of parathyroidectomy
         at the time of the study. All patients were receiving conventional 3.5 to 4.5-h HD,
         three times weekly, with synthetic (polysulphone or helixone) dialyzers, bicarbonate
         dialysate and tinzaparin as standard anticoagulation. Dialysis prescription was guided
         by a goal of achieving a value of Kt/V ≥1.2, as calculated by the second-generation
         Daugirdas equation. The achieved Kt/V was 1.46 ±0.21 (range 0.92 – 2.0).
      
      The protocol conformed to the ethical guidelines of our institution and it was approved
         by the Institutional Review Board of “Hippokration” General Hospital. All patients
         signed an informed consent prior to the study entry.
      
      Laboratory methods
      Blood samples were drawn from a peripheral vein under fasting conditions in the morning
         of a midweek routine dialysis session. Serum samples were separated from clotted blood
         by immediate centrifugation (1500g for 10 min), aliquoted and stored at −70°C until
         assay. Serum levels of fetuin-A and OPG were measured by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent
         assay (ELISA) using commercially available standard kits (human fetuin-A and human
         osteoprotegerin, BioVendor GmbH Heidelberg, Germany, detection limit 0.35 ng/ml and
         0.10 pmol/L respectively). Serum albumin, total cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL cholesterol,
         LDL cholesterol, calcium, phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase were determined by routine
         techniques using an automated analyser (Olympus AU560, Hamburg, Germany). Levels of
         albumin were time averaged for the last six months before inclusion in the study.
         Intact parathormone (iPTH) levels were measured by radioimmunoassay (RIA). Serum CRP
         levels were measured by nephelometry. The detection limit was 3.75 mg/L and in the
         statistical evaluation all values &lt;3.75 mg/L were treated as 3 mg/L.
      
      PWV measurements
      cfPWV measurements were performed with the SphygmoCor® (AtCor® Medical, Sydney, Australia),
         by a trained operator unaware of the patient’s clinical and laboratory parameters.
         The device uses a high-fidelity applanation tonometer for transdermal pulse wave recording.
         Each subject was examined in the supine position during a mid-week non-dialysis day
         and within one month from blood sampling. cfPWV measurements were done in two steps.
         The first step involved recording the carotid pulse wave, and the second recording
         the femoral pulse wave, both with simultaneous ECG, for synchronization of carotid
         and femoral pulse wave times. Transit time between carotid and femoral pressure waves
         was calculated using the foot-to-foot method. Wave “foots” were identified using the
         intersecting tangents algorithm. Two distances on the body surface were measured,
         that is, from sternal notch to the femoral location and from sternal notch to the
         carotid location of the respective pulse wave recording sites. On entering the data
         into the computer, travelled distance was calculated automatically as the difference
         between the two distances, that is, femoral location-sternal notch minus sternal notch-carotid
         location. cfPWV results were expressed in meters per second (m/s) ± SD [13]. Measurements were considered reliable if the SD was ≤ 15% of the velocity value.
         The mean of three such measurements was considered in the analysis. In two cases cfPWV
         could not be reliably measured due to atrial fibrillation and impalpable femoral pulse.
      
      IMT measurements
      Ultrasonographic studies were performed with an Aloka® Prosound A6 instrument (Aloka®,
         Tokyo, Japan), using a 10 MHz high-resolution probe. Each subject was examined in
         the supine position in a semi-dark room during a mid-week non-dialysis day within
         one month from blood sampling. The common carotid artery was investigated bilaterally
         by the same trained operator, who was unaware of the patients’ clinical and laboratory
         parameters. Longitudinal 2D images of the vessel were acquired, frozen in diastole
         and analysed offline. ccIMT was calculated as the distance between the leading edge
         of the lumen–intima interface and the media–adventitia interface on the far wall of
         the artery [14]. Measurements were performed 0.5, 1 and 2 cm below the carotid bifurcation (six measurements,
         three on each side) in a plaque-free arterial segment. The average measurement of
         the obtained values was taken as ccIMT and it was considered in the analysis.
      
      Blood pressure measurements
      Blood pressure was recorded with an upper arm mercury sphygmomanometer according to
         the recommendations of the American Heart Association [15], before the cfPWV measurement. The mean value in mmHg of three measurements of systolic
         arterial pressure (SAP) and diastolic arterial pressure (DAP) was entered in the analysis.
         Pulse pressure (PP) was calculated as the difference between SAP and DAP, and mean
         arterial pressure (MAP) was calculated as [SAP + (2 × DAP)] / 3. Hypertension was
         defined as systolic blood pressure &gt;140mmHg and/or diastolic &gt;90mmHg or the current
         use of anti-hypertensive medication.
      
      Statistical analysis
      Data are expressed as mean ± SD, median with range, or number of patients with percentage
         as appropriate. The associations between fetuin-A, OPG, cfPWV, ccIMT, and demographic,
         clinical and laboratory parameters were assessed. Normality of distribution of continuous
         variables was tested by the one sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Non-normally distributed
         variables were log-transformed before entering the analysis. The significance of differences
         between groups was assessed by the independent samples t-test. Associations between
         continuous variables were tested by Pearson’s bivariate and partial correlation analyses.
         Multiple linear regression analysis, with simultaneous inclusion of values into the
         model, was used to assess the adjusted combined influence of variables on the dependent
         variables (cfPWV or ccIMT). Variables with p &lt; 0.1 on bivariate analyses or the independent samples t-test were entered into the
         multiple regression models. Despite the significant bivariate correlation of SAP and
         PP with cfPWV, and DP and MAP with ccIMT, only PP and MAP respectively were entered
         in the relevant multiple regression models, in order to avoid co-linearity. The calculations
         were performed using SPSS for Windows® version 13.0 statistical software (SPSS®, Chicago,
         IL, USA). A two-tailed p value &lt;0.05 was considered statistically significant.
      
   

