Methods
   
      This single center study was conducted at Profil Institute for Clinical Research (Chula
         Vista, CA, USA) and was conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice and the
         principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The study protocol and subject information
         were reviewed and approved by Biomedical Research Institute of America investigational
         reviewer board (San Diego, CA, USA) and all subjects provided written, informed consent
         prior to start of study-related procedures.
      
      Subjects
      Ten healthy male and female subjects followed by a separate group of 6 subjects with
         T2DM were enrolled in this study. Enrollment of women was restricted to those who
         were postmenopausal or surgically sterile. All subjects gave written informed consent
         prior to participation in any study-related procedures. Healthy subjects were required
         to be 18–55&nbsp;years of age, and have a body mass index (BMI) of 19.0 to 30.0&nbsp;kg/m2 inclusive. Subjects with T2DM were required to be 30–60&nbsp;years of age, have a BMI
         of 22–35&nbsp;kg/m2, to be healthy other than having been diagnosed with T2DM at least 6&nbsp;months prior
         to entry in the study, and to have been maintained on a stable treatment regimen for
         at least 3&nbsp;months. Diabetic subjects were required to have hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c)
         ≤10% and fasting plasma glucose &lt;280&nbsp;mg/dL at screening. Participants with diabetes
         were required to be on a stable treatment regimen using a single oral antidiabetic
         agent (either sulfonylureas, rosiglitazone, metformin or acarbose) or management by
         diet and exercise. All T2DM subjects also had to be willing and medically able to
         discontinue their diabetes medications for up to 72&nbsp;h during each treatment period.
         Subjects were excluded if they had been taking diuretics, corticosteroids or other
         medications that might result in electrolyte depletion; had required insulin during
         the last 3&nbsp;months; had significant renal disease; or if their participation would
         have resulted in donation of blood in excess of 550&nbsp;mL within an 8-week period.
      
      Study design
      This double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, single escalating-dose crossover
         study was conducted in two parts: Part A consisted of a randomized, dose-escalation
         in healthy subjects; Part B was of similar design, but conducted in subjects with
         T2DM and included an evaluation of pharmacodynamics using a 50&nbsp;g oral glucose tolerance
         test (OGTT).
      
      Part A
      Ten healthy subjects were evaluated in 5 study sessions, each separated by approximately
         2&nbsp;weeks. At each study session, subjects received either an oral dose of remogliflozin
         etabonate or placebo after an overnight fast. Remogliflozin etabonate doses were 20&nbsp;mg,
         50&nbsp;mg, 150&nbsp;mg, 500&nbsp;mg and 1000&nbsp;mg. Over the course of participation in the study,
         each subject received 4 of the 5 active remogliflozin etabonate doses and 1 dose of
         placebo (4:1 active to placebo ratio per treatment period). The available safety and
         PK results from each dosing period were evaluated before proceeding to the next dose
         level.
      
      Part B
      Six subjects with T2DM received two doses of remogliflozin etabonate and a placebo
         dose, in a randomized, dose escalating, crossover design, along with an oral glucose
         load on three study sessions separated by 7–14&nbsp;days. Full PK and safety profiles were
         measured on Day 1 of each dosing period. The doses selected for this portion of the
         study, 50&nbsp;mg and 500&nbsp;mg, were based on data obtained in Part A. In each dosing period,
         subjects were assigned to active vs placebo in a 2:1 ratio.
      
      All subjects were admitted to the unit two nights prior to receiving study drug to
         establish baseline safety parameters and fluid intake levels over a 36&nbsp;h period. Subjects
         remained in the unit for at least 24&nbsp;h after doses were administered for monitoring
         of clinical laboratory parameters exploratory biomarkers, vital signs, ECGs and adverse
         events. While confined to the clinical research unit, all subjects received meals
         standardized with respect to calories, fat, protein, carbohydrate, and sodium content;
         however, detailed dietary information was not captured in this study. In Part A, subjects
         were dosed following an overnight fast; lunch and dinner were provided at 4 and 10&nbsp;h
         after dosing, respectively. Fifteen&nbsp;minutes after dosing in each treatment period
         in Part B, a fasting OGTT was performed using 50&nbsp;g glucose (administered as 50&nbsp;g Glucola™).
         A 50&nbsp;g glucose load was chosen since the OGTT was being performed in subjects already
         known to have diabetes. The glucose drink was consumed by subjects within approximately
         5&nbsp;minutes. Blood samples for the measurement of glucose, insulin, and intact glucagon-like
         peptide 1 (GLP-1) were collected for 24&nbsp;hours following dose administration. Provided
         that there were no safety or tolerability concerns, subjects were released from the
         clinic on day 2 of each treatment period until their return for the next treatment
         or follow-up period. Each subject was involved in the study for approximately 8&nbsp;weeks
         (from screening to follow-up).
      
      Pharmacokinetic assessments
      Blood collections and analysis
      On each dosing day, a series of 2.0&nbsp;mL blood samples were collected at pre-dose and
         10, 20, 30 and 45&nbsp;min, and 1, 1.25, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, and 24&nbsp;h post-dose
         for the determination of remogliflozin etabonate, remogliflozin and GSK279782 in plasma
         by using high-performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)
         as described [23].
      
      Pharmacokinetic calculations
      Non-compartmental PK analysis of plasma concentration–time data was performed using
         WinNonlin Version 4.1 (Pharsight Corporation, Mountainview, CA, USA). The Cmax and Tmax were obtained directly from the data. Areas under the plasma concentration–time curves
         from time zero to the last quantifiable time point (AUC[0–last]) and extrapolated to infinity (AUC[0–∞]) were calculated using the log-linear trapezoidal method. The terminal plasma elimination
         rate-constant (λz) was estimated from log-linear regression analysis of the terminal
         phase of the plasma concentration–time curve, and the T½ was calculated as T½ = ln2/λz. Ratios of AUC(0–∞) remogliflozin to AUC(0–last) remogliflozin etabonate were calculated including molecular weight corrections.
      
      Pharmacodynamic assessments
      Plasma pharmacodynamics
      Blood samples for glucose were taken at 0 (pre-dose), and 1, 2, 4, 8 and 12&nbsp;h after
         dosing in each treatment period (Part A). For Part B, blood samples for glucose, insulin
         and GLP-1 were taken at check-in on day -2, and at 0 h (pre-dose), and 0.5, 1, 1.5,
         2, 4&nbsp;h (prior to lunch), 4.5, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 24&nbsp;h after dosing on day 1 of each
         treatment period.
      
      Glucose and insulin sample handling
      For glucose, plasma was analyzed using a YSI 2300 Glucose Analyzer (Yellow Springs
         International Life Sciences, Yellow Springs, OH, USA). For insulin, plasma was rapidly
         prepared and frozen at -70°C until analyzed by LabCorp (San Diego, CA, USA) using
         a chemiluminescent immunometric assay method (Siemen’s Immulite 2000 analyzer with
         Immulite Insulin Kit L2KIN2).
      
      GLP-1 sample handling
      For assay of intact GLP-1, blood was collected into a chilled EDTA tube and protease
         inhibitors (DPP4 inhibitor obtained from EMD Millipore, St. Charles, MO) were immediately
         added. Samples were then spun down and plasma split into two separate tubes and frozen
         at -70°C until analyzed by Pathway Diagnostics (Malibu, CA, USA) by ELISA (kit # EGLP-35&nbsp;K,
         EMD Millipore). The lowest level of intact GLP-1 this assay can detect is 2 pM (with
         a minimum plasma sample size of 0.4&nbsp;mL).
      
      Urine pharmacodynamics
      Sample collection
      Urine samples were collected at pre-dose, and over a series of intervals (0–2, 2–4,
         4–6, 6–8, 8–12 and 12–24&nbsp;h post-dose) for the analysis of creatinine, glucose and
         electrolytes (Na, K and Cl). All fluid intake was recorded, as well as urine volume,
         over the 24&nbsp;hours before and after dosing in each treatment period. Urine was tested
         for protein on the first morning void of day -1 and 24&nbsp;h after dosing.
      
      Calculations
      Creatinine clearance (CLCR) was calculated as the amount of creatinine excreted in 24&nbsp;h (Ae0–24 h) divided by the mean of the pre-dose and 24-h post-dose plasma creatinine levels.
         The percentage of filtered glucose excreted in the urine for each individual time
         period was calculated as the amount of glucose excreted during that time period divided
         by (CLCR × PG × time interval length), where CLCR is the creatinine clearance for the time interval, PG is the plasma glucose concentration
         closest to the midpoint of the time interval, and the time interval is the period
         (min) of urine collection (CLCR × PG represents the glucose filtered load). For the 24-h period, the percentage of
         filtered glucose excreted was calculated as the amount of glucose excreted over 24&nbsp;h
         divided by the sum over the individual time intervals of (CLCR × PG × time interval length).
      
      Statistical analysis
      Safety and pharmacodynamic data were summarized using descriptive statistics. This
         was a small exploratory study and no formal hypothesis-testing was conducted. Dose
         proportionality with respect to Cmax, and AUC was assessed using the power model y = α doseβ, where y = Cmax or AUC, and α denotes a random subject effect. The exponent β in the power model
         will be estimated by regressing the loge-transformed PK parameters on loge dose, i.e. ln(PK parameter) = ln(α) + β * ln(dose). Dose proportionality implied
         that β = 1 and was assessed by estimating β and its corresponding 90% confidence interval.
         The power model was fitted by restricted maximum likelihood using SAS Proc Mixed.
      
   

