Methods
   
      The data source for this study was the Australian Department of Veterans’ Affairs
         (DVA) administrative claims databases. DVA claims data contain records of prescription
         medicines dispensed under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and Repatriation Pharmaceutical
         Benefits Scheme, medical and allied health services and hospital admissions provided
         to subjects for whom DVA pays a subsidy. The treatment population is approximately
         310,000 subjects, and there are approximately 100 million pharmacy records, 200 million
         medical and allied health service records and over 6 million hospital admission records.
         A client file is maintained by DVA which includes data on gender, date of birth, date
         of death and family status. We undertook two study designs using the same populations
         and study inclusion and exclusion criteria. The study period was the 1st July 2007
         to the 30th June 2011. In both studies eligible subjects were those 65&nbsp;years of age
         or over at the 1st July 2007, who had a least one medication prescribed in the 6&nbsp;months
         prior to entry into the cohort and who were eligible for all health services subsidised
         by DVA. Entry into both studies was the 1st July 2007. Subjects were excluded if they had been prescribed a proton pump inhibitor
         in the 12&nbsp;months prior to the study start or a histamine 2 receptor antagonist (H2RA)
         in the six months prior to or during the study. The reason for excluding H2RA is because
         we were interested in the more potent medicine, proton pump inhibitors and including
         H2RAs could have diluted the effect if it exists with proton pump inhibitors.
      
      For both studies, exposure was determined by identifying prescription data on proton
         pump inhibitors (omeprazole, pantoprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole, esomeprazole)
         and the outcome of interest was a primary diagnosis of pneumonia (ICD-10: J12, J13,
         J14, J15, J16, J17, J18) during the study period.
      
      Dosage information was not available in the data set so duration of proton pump inhibitor
         use was defined as the period within which 75% of subjects returned for a repeat dispensing
         of the medicine. This was calculated using the entire database as 36&nbsp;days. This is
         consistent with the standard package size of proton pump inhibitors of 28–30 tablets,
         taken once daily. Exposure to proton pump inhibitors was defined as the date from
         when a prescription was dispensed plus 72&nbsp;days (1 duration interval of 36&nbsp;days plus
         a grace period of 36&nbsp;days). Any person-time in the study prior to a subject’s first
         prescription was considered unexposed time. Subjects with no record of dispensing
         of a proton pump inhibitor for more than 72&nbsp;days after their last dispensing were
         considered unexposed to a proton pump inhibitor from 72&nbsp;days after their last dispensing.
         This was to allow for possible non-compliance and stock piling of medicine. Therefore,
         for both studies exposure to a proton pump inhibitor is a time dependent variable.
         Inclusion of unexposed time prior to proton pump inhibitors initiation helps to prevent
         immortal time bias being a factor in this study design [10].
      
      For both studies, the time after initiation of a proton pump inhibitor was stratified
         into a priori risk periods: 1 to 7&nbsp;days, 8 to 30&nbsp;days and greater than 30&nbsp;days. The actual day
         of initiation was excluded from the analysis because in cases where the pneumonia
         hospitalisation occurred on the same day it was not possible to determine which occurred
         first.
      
      For the cohort study, eligible subjects were followed until death, pneumonia hospitalization
         or study end (30 June 2011). The numbers of hospitalisations for pneumonia during
         exposed and non-exposed times were determined. Individuals could be unexposed for
         the whole study or they could have unexposed periods before and after exposure to
         a proton pump inhibitor. Hospitalisation rates were calculated as the cumulative number
         of hospitalisations in each period divided by the number of days at risk. Rate Ratios
         were calculated using Poisson generalised estimating equations (GEE) to allow for
         clustering of observations within patients, adjusting for both fixed and time-varying
         confounders. Fixed confounders were assessed at study entry; including age, gender,
         socioeconomic index of disadvantage for area of residence [11]. The following time-varying confounders were determined annually; number of co-morbidities
         (using the validated Rx-Risk-V [12] score), number of prescriptions, number of prescribers, number of pharmacies and
         number of occupational therapy visits and speech pathology services. The remaining
         time-varying confounders changed as the season changed (season), when subjects entered
         aged care (residential aged-care status) and when they had their first script of tiotropium
         as a proxy indicator of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and first concurrent
         use of angiotensin renin system medicines with frusemide as a proxy indicator of those
         with heart failure. All the above confounders were included in the model and the decision
         to include them was based on clinical knowledge.
      
      For the self-controlled case series study, eligible subjects were all subjects who
         had a hospitalisation with a primary diagnosis of pneumonia during the study period
         between 1st January 2007 and 30th June 2011. These are the same subjects who were
         identified in the cohort study as having a hospitalisation for pneumonia. Exposure
         to proton pump inhibitors was calculated and time partitioned into unexposed time
         and pre and post exposure times. Subjects with a pneumonia hospitalisation but with
         no record of being prescribed a proton pump inhibitor were included to adjust for
         the change in the underlying hospitalisation rate associated with age [2]. In addition to the post-exposure risk periods, two consecutive 30&nbsp;day (1–30, 31–60&nbsp;days)
         and a 60&nbsp;day (61–120&nbsp;days) pre-exposure risk periods were included prior to proton
         pump inhibitor initiation; to allow for time periods where proton pump inhibitors
         may have been initiated as a result of hospitalisation. The consequence of not partitioning
         this prior exposure would be an increase in the rate of pneumonia hospitalisations
         in the unexposed period. This would cause a bias towards the null in the exposed resulting
         in a decrease in the rate ratios in the post exposure periods. All residual time before
         and after exposure was considered unexposed and used for the baseline comparison.
         In each risk period, the cumulative number of hospitalisations was divided by the
         person-years at risk and these were compared to the risk in the baseline period (Figure&nbsp;1). If a subject was re-hospitalised within 30&nbsp;days, the subsequent hospitalisation(s)
         were excluded as they were considered to be related and part of the same episode [2]. Rate ratios were calculated using conditional Poisson regression, with results presented
         as adjusted rate ratios and 95% confidence intervals. We also performed two sensitivity
         analyses for the self-controlled case series 1) adjusted for the same time-varying
         confounders as the cohort study, 2) analysis restricted to patients alive at hospital
         discharge. The self-controlled case series design controls implicitly for fixed covariates
         [2,3], however, all SCCS analyses were adjusted for time-varying age and study year. All
         analyses were performed using SAS version 9.12 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). This research
         has ethics approval from the Department of Veteran Affairs human research committee
         and the University of South Australia human research committee.
      
      Figure 1. A graphical representation of the self-controlled case-series design for patients (a) exposed to a proton pump inhibitor (b) unexposed to a proton pump inhibitor.
   

