Methods
   
      RNA extraction and library preparation
      OP and CP clones of Brachionus calyciflorus homozygous for the op and wild-type alleles, respectively, were generated from the same heterozygous mother
         by selfing [18]. Six B. calyciflorus females were added to 600&nbsp;mL cultures of 5 × 105 cells/mL Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in COMBO medium [25]. The cultures grew at 25 C and with 24&nbsp;hour light exposure for ~6&nbsp;days. Density of
         females was determined every day by removal of ~10&nbsp;mL of culture and counting individual
         females under a microscope at low magnification. When cultures reached a density of
         ~25-40 females/mL, they were harvested for RNA. To confirm the presence of sexually-reproducing
         females in the CP cultures, a sample of females was used to determine rate of mixis
         induction as described previously [26], and the absence of males and resting eggs was confirmed for the OP cultures. The
         rotifer cultures were filtered through 20&nbsp;μm Millipore nylon filters to remove algal
         cells, the rotifers were washed in COMBO medium, and rinsed into 15&nbsp;mL conical tubes.
         Total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent (Ambion, Life Technologies, Grand Island,
         NY) according to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA quality was determined by Experion
         Automated Electrophoresis (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) according to manufacturer’s
         instructions before construction of mRNA-seq libraries using the mRNA-seq Sample Prep
         kit (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA). Seventy-six base pair single end reads were sequenced
         from each library on an Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx platform at the Iowa State University
         DNA Facility (http://www.dna.iastate.edu/nextgen.html webcite).
      
      Illumina sequence analysis
      Analysis of Illumina sequence reads was performed in part using the Galaxy server
         (http://galaxyproject.org/ webcite) [27-29]. Adapter sequences were trimmed from the ends of the reads, and a blastn search revealed
         reads that matched C. reinhardtii transcripts [30]. Reads with an alignment length ≥ 20 base pairs matching an algal sequence were removed
         from the libraries. Transcriptome assembly was performed using the Tuxedo pipeline,
         where reads were mapped to a partial assembly of the B. calyciflorus genome [31]via Tophat [32], assembled into transcripts using Cufflinks (assembly for individual samples with
         0.1 minimum isoform fraction and 0.1 pre-mRNA fraction) and Cuffmerge (combined assembly
         from all samples). Differential expression was determined between OP and CP samples
         with Cuffdiff using a minimum alignment count of 500 [33,34]. Differential expression between OP and CP samples was also determined with edgeR
         using a table of counts constructed with the fragments per kilobase locus length per million reads mapped (FPKM) values determined by Cufflinks [34]. Gene ontology mapping and enrichment analyses were performed with BLAST2GO (http://www.blast2go.com/b2ghome webcite). The transcriptome assembly projects have been deposited at GenBank under the accessions
         GACQ00000000 and GACL00000000. The versions described in this paper are the first
         versions, GACQ01000000 and GACL01000000. Assembled transcripts shorter than 200 base
         pairs are given in Additional files 1, 2, 3 and 4.
      
      Additional file 1. Assembled transcripts for sample OP1 less than 200 base pairs in length.
         	Format: FASTA 
         	Size: 783KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Additional file 2. Assembled transcripts for sample OP2 less than 200 base pairs in length.
         	Format: FASTA 
         	Size: 1.1MB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Additional file 3. Assembled transcripts for sample CP1 less than 200 base pairs in length.
         	Format: FASTA 
         	Size: 1.4MB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Additional file 4. Assembled transcripts for sample CP2 less than 200 base pairs in length.
         	Format: FASTA 
         	Size: 1.5MB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Library validation
      OP and CP RNA samples used for Illumina library construction were treated with DNase
         I prior to first-strand cDNA synthesis using Superscript II reverse transcriptase
         (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Quantitative reverse transcriptase
         polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed with Platinum SYBR Green quantitative
         PCR (qPCR) Supermix (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and a 1:25 dilution
         of the cDNA. Primers designed for amplification of thirteen genes from cDNA in the
         qPCR reaction (200&nbsp;nM final concentration) are listed in Additional file 5. Relative quantification of gene expression was determined for each gene, with actin
         transcript amplification used for normalization.
      
      Additional file 5. Primers used in qRT-PCR.
         	Format: XLSX 
         	Size: 61KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Phylogenetic analysis
      For analysis of histone H2A, amino acid sequences of metazoan and fungal homologs
         were obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database
         by keyword search and aligned with B. calyciflorus sequences by ClustalX version 2.1 [35]. Alignments were manually curated in MacClade (http://macclade.org/index.html webcite) and phylogenetic analysis was performed using the Bioportal parallel computational
         resource [36]. Maximum likelihood analysis was performed using PhyML [37] with Whelan and Goldman (WAG) substitution model, best tree topology search, and
         one thousand bootstrap replicates.
      
      Bdelloid sequence analysis
      Transcript sequences for Adineta ricciae were obtained from GenBank (Accession numbers: HE687510 to HE716431). A. ricciae transcripts were used as queries against the assembled B. calyciflorus transcriptome using tblastx [38] with a Bit Score cutoff of 50. Gene ontology term enrichment was performed using
         BLAST2GO [39].
      
   

