Methods
   
      Animal experimental procedures
      Wild-type and white mutant (d/d) axolotls were kept at 14–20°C in tap water at pH&nbsp;6.5-7.5.
         Juvenile axolotls with an approximate 80 to 90&nbsp;mm snout to vent length were subjected
         to denervation at the brachial plexus (third to fifth spinal nerves) of the right
         upper limbs, leaving the nerve ends a gap of at least 5&nbsp;mm. After 1 wk, amputation
         was performed at both forearms at the mid-radius/ulna. At 14 d post-amputation, the
         full-thickness skin at the tip of limb was gently peeled away by cutting through the
         full-thickness skin around the circumference of the limb with spring scissors, and
         the blastemas in the left forearms and non-regenerating stump tissues in the right
         forearms were collected for total RNA extraction. All the surgical experiments were
         conducted under anesthesia with 0.1% MS-222 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Animal
         care and experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
         Use Committee of National Taiwan University College of Medicine.
      
      RNA extraction and library preparation
      Total RNA was extracted using Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and isolated
         by RNeasy mini-columns (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA). RNA quality was assessed by
         spectrophotometry. A fragmentation buffer (100 mM ZnCl2 in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7) was added to cut mRNAs into short fragments. Fragmented RNA
         was reverse-transcribed to first-strand cDNA with reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen)
         in the presence of a random hexamer-primer (Invitrogen) and dNTPs for 50 min at 42°C.
         The second-strand cDNA was synthesized using DNA polymerase I in a buffer containing
         dNTPs and RNaseH. The short DNA fragments were purified using the QiaQuick PCR extraction
         kit (Qiagen) and resolved with an elution buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.5) for end reparation
         and addition of a poly(A) fragment to both ends. Thereafter, the short fragments were
         connected with sequencing adapters and then separated in gels by electrophoresis.
         The fragments with a size suitable for NGS were cut from gels and eluted for PCR amplification
         by using adapter primers.
      
      Analysis of Illumina sequencing results
      Four analytic procedures were conducted on the RNA-seq data.
      Illumina sequencing and de novo assembly
      The 2 cDNA libraries were sequenced from both the 5' and 3' ends on the Illumina GA
         II following the manufacturer’s instructions. The low-quality raw sequences were removed.
         The remaining short reads with their adaptor sequences trimmed were assembled in a
         de novo process using 3 assemblers: Trinity [40], trans-ABySS [41], and SOAP de-novo [42]. Similar assembly parameters were used for the 3 assemblers to compare performance.
         Trinity and SOAP de-novo used the default k-mer setting [40,42], and trans-ABySS was run using k-mer values of 45, 46, to 89 [41]. All assemblies were performed on a server with 24 cores and 128&nbsp;GB of memory. After
         assembly, the contigs longer than 100 bases were used for subsequent analysis.
      
      Functional annotation
      BLASTx [53] was performed to align the assembled contigs from the 3 assemblers to the nr protein
         database for functional annotation. The e-value cut-off was set at 1E-5 for further
         analysis. Each assembled contig was assigned with the gene name and related function
         based on the best BLASTx hit (the smallest e-value). Assembled contigs assigned to
         the same gene were further compared, and the contig from the best e-value was adopted.
         If there was a tie between 2 assembled sequences, the one with the largest sequence
         identity was selected. In the end, with respect to each assembler, a unique contig
         was used to represent a potential gene of axolotl, and this gene was named by the
         corresponding protein in Xenopus laevis.
      
      Quantization of transcript sequences
      Quantitative analysis was performed using CLCbio (CLC Genomics Workbench 4.8, parameter
         settings: minimum length fraction, 0.5; minimum similarity fraction, 0.95; maximum
         number of hits for a read, 10). The reads from 2 libraries were mapped to the selected
         assembled contigs for various assemblers. The read counts accumulated on the selected
         contigs were further normalized as RPKM values.
      
      Identification of differentially expressed genes
      The fold change of RPKM values (the RPKM is replaced with 0.01 if it equals zero)
         from the libraries of the two tissue types was calculated to identify differentially
         expressed genes. Because diverse assemblers deliver different sets of potential axolotl
         genes, only those homologous to a Xenopus laevis protein and having corresponding contigs from all the 3 assemblers were further analyzed.
         The genes with 2-fold up- or down-regulation that were consistent among the 3 assemblers
         were identified.
      
      qPCR for mRNA quantification
      RNA was prepared using Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen). The RNA samples of the blastema
         tissue and denervated stump end were harvested from the upper limbs 14 days after
         amputation. The total RNA was reverse-transcribed to first-strand cDNA with reverse
         transcriptase (Invitrogen) in the presence of a random hexamer-primer (Invitrogen)
         and dNTPs for 50 min at 42°C. The expression levels of specific mRNAs were determined
         by qPCR using respective primer pairs (Additional file 5). Each reaction was conducted in a total volume of 20 μL containing 50 ng first-strand cDNA, 10 μL 2X Fast SYBR® Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and each primer pair at
         0.5 μM. A Step One™ Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) was used. Data was analyzed
         using Step One™ software version 2.1 (Applied Biosystems). Error bars indicate RQ
         max and RQ min.
      
      Additional file 5. Primer pairs used in qPCR for validating the differentially expressed genes.
         	Format: XLSX 
         	Size: 15KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      In situ hybridization
      
      Templates of cDNA for axolotl patched-2(319&nbsp;bp) and pax7 (303&nbsp;bp) were amplified by RT-PCR using respective sense primers linked to SP6 promoter
         sequence and anti-sense primers linked to T7 promoter sequence. Sense and anti-sense
         RNA probes were synthesized from the cDNA templates using a digoxigenin RNA labeling
         kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA). RNA probes
         were prepared using respective primers: patched-2 (anti-sense), 5' CGATTTAGGTGACACTATAGAAGAGTCCAACGACGTGAGGACAAGA- 3'; patched-2 (sense), 5'- CGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGATTGAGCTGGATGGCGTGAA-3'; pax7 (anti-sense), 5'-CGATTTAGGTGACACTATAGAAGAGAAACAGGCAGGAGCCAATCAA-3'; and pax7 (sense), 5'-CGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGAGCTGACCGGATTCATGTGGTT-3'.
      
      Blastema tissues were fixed overnight at 4°C in 4% paraformaldehyde in 1× phosphate
         buffered saline (PBS) and subsequently embedded in Tissue-Tek (Thermo Scientific,
         Miami, FL, USA) and frozen at −80°C until sectioning at 10 μm. Before hybridization, sections were digested with 1 μg/mL proteinase K in 1× PBS at room temperature for 8 min, fixed again in 4% paraformaldehyde
         in 1x PBS at room temperature for 20 min, and carbonated with diethypyrocarbonate
         in 1× PBS. The slides were covered with Hybri-well Press-seal hybridization chambers
         (Sigma-Aldrich) and hybridized overnight at 58°C with pre-denatured DIG-labeled probes
         in a hybridization solution (Roche). After hybridization, the slides were washed in
         5× SSC twice, each for 1 h, at 65°C, and then in 0.1× SSC for 30 min at room temperature.
         The slides were rinsed in a buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and 150 mM
         NaCl. The slides were incubated at 4°C overnight in the same buffer containing an
         alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-digoxigenin antibody (Roche) diluted at 1:1000.
         The slides were washed in PBST (0.1% TritonX-100 in PBS) 3 times for 30 min each at
         room temperature. The signals of alkaline phosphatase activities bound on the anti-DIG-antibody
         were detected using a mixture of the BCIP/NBT solution (Sigma-Aldrich).
      
   

