Methods
   
      A total of 36 patients (14 males and 22 females) undergoing DP between May 2005 and
         December 2011 were included in this study and retrospectively analyzed. All patients
         were studied preoperatively by contrast-enhanced computed tomography or magnetic resonance
         imaging. Indications for surgery were benign, borderline or malignant tumors, chronic
         pancreatitis and pancreatic pseudocysts. Surgical operation consisted in an en-bloc
         resection of the pancreas tail, eventually extended to the body, associated with splenectomy
         or other organs resection if needed. In all cases an open approach was performed by
         a single surgeon. Most of pancreato-jejunostomies were performed not consecutively
         in the first period of this study, between May 2005 and October 2008, depending on
         the surgeon preference. From November 2008 all patients undergoing DP were enrolled
         in another survey in which the pancreatic stump was closed by direct suture with the
         technique described below. Then we retrospectively observed and analyzed different
         outcomes between the two techniques.
      
      Patients were divided in two groups on the basis of pancreatic stump management. In
         the first group (Group A), after pancreatic resection, the stump closure was accomplished
         by ligating the main pancreatic duct with non-resorbable Z-shaped suture and the cut
         margin was over sewn a traumatically by U-shaped stitches using non-resorbable material
         (TiCron®, Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA) supported by PTFE (Teflon) pledgets used as
         buttress for the suture (Figure&nbsp;1). In the second group (Group B), the main pancreatic duct was closed with the same
         technique described above and the pancreatic stump was finally invaginated into a
         jejunal loop performing a Roux-en-Y end-to-end pancreato-jejunostomy. The anastomosis
         was completed by a capsule-to-seromuscular single layer suture with non-resorbable
         interrupted stitches (Figure&nbsp;2). A drain was placed intraoperatively in all cases near the anastomosis or the pancreatic
         stump. All patients received a short-term antibiotic prophylaxis.
      
      Figure 1. Hand-sewn closure of the pancreatic remnant. The pancreatic remnant is closed using PTFE pledget-supported interrupted stitches
         of non-resorbable material.
      
      Figure 2. Roux-en-Y end-to-end pancreato-jejunostomy. The pancreatic stump is invaginated into the jejunal loop and a capsule-to-seromuscular
         suture is performed using non-resorbable interrupted stitches.
      
      Intravenous fluids, octreotide (3 × 0.1 mg s.c., daily for 5–7 days) and proton pump
         inhibitors (omeprazole, 40 mg i.v., daily) were administrated postoperatively. Oral
         feeding was generally resumed depending on gastrointestinal function. Drainage volume
         and amylase concentration of drained fluid were measured and registered in the 1st, 3rd, 5th and 7th postoperative day as well as blood tests.
      
      Patient demographics, operation data, post-operative morbidity, mortality rate and
         length of hospital stay were analyzed and compared between the two groups. PF was
         defined as a drain output of any measurable volume of fluid on or after postoperative
         day 3 with an amylase content greater than 3 times the upper normal serum value, in
         accordance to the International Study Group of Pancreatic Fistula (ISGPF) [15]. PF was also classified into three grades (A,B,C) depending on clinical impact (none,
         moderate and severe, respectively), according to the ISGPF classification. The pancreatic
         texture was defined as “fibrotic” or “non-fibrotic” depending on histological findings
         of the specimens: presence of perilobular fibrosis, chronic inflammatory reactions
         with ductal dilatations, atrophy of the acinar cells. The main pancreatic duct (MPD)
         was also defined as “small” or “large” according to the diameter &lt; or &gt; 3 mm, respectively.
         Postoperative hemorrhage (PH) was defined and classified into three different grades
         (A,B,C), according to the International Study Group of Pancreatic Surgery definition
         (ISGPS) [16]. Mortality was considered as any death occurred intraoperatively or during the hospital
         stay.
      
      Statistical analysis was performed using χ2 test and Student’s t-test. Differences were considered significant at p-value &lt;0.05.
      
      The present study is a retrospective review of medical data and the human research
         ethics committee of our institution stated to exempt it from formal ethical review
         according to the ethical principles laid forth by the Helsinki Declaration. Written
         consent of patients was not sought. No identifying information was recorded by the
         authors.
      
   

