Methods
   
      Recordings and acoustic analysis
      Recordings of anuran vocalizations were digitally copied as WAV files from commercially
         available CDs (see Additional file 1) comprising calls from North, South, and Central America, Europe, South Africa, Japan
         and Korea. Only advertisement calls representing single males were used. For each
         CD track, the longest continuous sequence containing only advertisement calls of a
         single male was extracted using the Praat software, version 5.1.44 [61]. Two separate non-identical recordings (obtained from different CDs and thus presumably
         different individuals) were used for 41 species. Only one high-quality recording was
         available for the remaining 49 species.
      
      The acoustic analysis was conducted using the MIR Toolbox 1.3.2 in MATLAB [62]. Acoustic parameters were analyzed using a window of 40 ms with hop-size of 20 ms,
         according to the method described in [23].
      
      Mean values for each recording were computed over all 40-ms frames for the following
         acoustic parameters: dominant frequency (DF), coefficient of variation of root-mean-square
         amplitude (CVA), spectral flux (SF), spectral flatness or tonality (TON), and spectral
         irregularity (SI). These five parameters were found to exhibit low multicollinearity
         in a set of 194 recordings that included the 131 recordings used in the current study
         [23]. For the 41 species for which two recordings were available, the mean values were
         averaged over both recordings; the mean values computed from a single recording were
         used for the remaining 49 species. Detailed values for each recording, as well as
         the mean values for species for which two recordings were available, are given in
         Additional file 3.
      
      Temperature data were available for some of the recordings and are provided in Additional
         file 3. These data were sparse and were not analyzed in the present study. In any case,
         temperature-induced effects on the acoustical properties of calls are presumably relatively
         small in comparison to taxonomical or ecological influences [63]. Moreover, DF has rarely been shown to be affected by temperature [28].
      
      Phylogenetic analysis
      Nucleotide sequence alignment
      Our genetic dataset consisted of nucleotide sequences of approximately 930 bp from
         the 12S rRNA region of the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) from 90 species belonging
         to four clades of anurans (Bufo, Hylinae, Leptodactylus, and Rana). As out-group, the same region of the mtDNA in the Siberian Salamander (Ranodon sibiricus, Family: Hynobiidae), California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma californiens, Family: Ambystomatidae) and Western Spadefoot Toad (Pelobates cultripes, Family: Pelobatidae) was used.
      
      In addition to the 12S mtDNA sequences, we analyzed a second dataset consisting of
         nucleotide sequences of 312 bp from exon 1 of the rhodopsin gene from 49 species belonging
         to three clades (Bufo, Hylinae and Rana). P. cultripes was used as out-group.
      
      All 12S and rhodopsin sequences were obtained from GenBank, using search and extraction
         tools developed in Biopython [64], and the validity of obtained DNA sequences was checked using BlastSearch (National
         Center for Biotechnology Information). The nucleotide sequences were aligned in BioEdit
         software version 7.0 [65].
      
      The Muscle (implemented in the software MEGA) [66], ClustalW2 [67], and Guidance methods [68] were all tested to obtain a reliable multiple sequence alignment. The ClustalW2 method
         was eventually used for the multiple sequence alignment on the 12S dataset with the
         following parameters: gap open penalties (GOP) = 10, gap extension penalties (GEP) = 0.2,
         gap distance = 5, and the UPGMA clustering method in BioEdit software version 7.0
         [65]. In the case of the rhodopsin gene, we used the Muscle Codon option, with GOP = −2.9,
         GEP = 0 and hydrophobicity multiplier = 1.2. Some sites were manually edited to maximize
         positional homology.
      
      Phylogenetic tree reconstruction
      The program jMODELTEST [69,70] was used to identify the evolutionary models and other parameters. Based on the Akaike
         Information Criterion (AICc), the GTR+Γ+I model (general time-reversible) [71] with a proportion of invariant sites (28.6% invariant sites) [72] and rates at other sites varying according to a gamma distribution (gamma shape = 0.53,
         number of discrete gamma categories = 4) best described the 12S sequence data [73,74]. However, the HKY model (Hasegawa-Kishino-Yano) [75] with gamma site heterogeneity model with 4 rate categories for the discrete approximation
         of the Gamma distribution rates among sites (HKY +Γ) (gamma shape = 0.31) best described
         the rhodopsin data.
      
      The phylogenetic relationship among various anuran clades was reconstructed using
         the Monte-Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) model implemented in BEAST version 1.6.2 [76]. We used a Yule tree prior that assumes a constant (unknown) lineage birth rate for
         each branch in the tree. This model is suitable for trees describing the phylogenetic
         relationship among individuals from many different species. Wide uniform prior distributions
         were used as defaults. A relaxed clock model [77] with uncorrelated lognormal distribution was used to reconstruct the genetic phylogenies.
         The MCMC model was run for 30,000,000 generations (10,000,000 generations for rhodopsin)
         with the initial 1,000,000 steps discarded as burn-in. Trees and model parameters
         were sampled every 1000 steps thereafter. Effective Sample Sizes (ESS) for mean evolutionary
         rate, population size and posterior likelihood were found to be &gt; 200 for all the
         models used. Subsequently, a single target tree with maximum clade credibility (MCC)
         and median node heights from a sample of trees produced by BEAST were constructed
         using TreeAnnotator v1.6.2 [78]. The initial 1000 trees were discarded as burn-in. Abouheif proximities were computed
         from the phylogenetic trees using the function ‘proxTips’ in the package ‘adephylo’
         in R [79].
      
      Estimating pairwise genetic distances using maximum likelihood
      Pairwise genetic distances for the 12S and rhodopsin nucleotide sequences were computed
         using the software MEGA [66]. Both transition and transversion nucleotide substitutions were included in calculating
         the genetic distance. Gaps and missing data were treated with the partial deletion
         option, and the bootstrap method with 500 replications was employed.
      
      Nucleotide substitution saturation test
      The nucleotide substitution saturation test was conducted on the 12S mtDNA dataset
         using DAMBE [46,47]. Because the test can only run on 32 taxonomic units and our sample included 90 species,
         10,000 replications with random resampling of subsets of 4, 8, 16, and 32 species
         were conducted, following the methodology described in [47].
      
      Snout-vent length
      SVL values in mm for males, taken from the literature, were used as an estimate of
         male body size [29]. Additional file 3 provides the median male SVL values for all 90 species included in this study, and
         Additional file 1 lists the sources used to obtain these data.
      
      Statistical analysis
      The phylogenetically corrected residuals of the acoustic parameters were computed
         using the ‘phyl_resid.R’ function in R [34]. Following the methodology described in [34], the ‘phyl_resid.R’ function used a variance-covariance matrix representing phylogenetic
         relatedness under the Brownian trait evolution model, which was computed from the
         phylogenetic tree using the function ‘vcv.phylo’ in the package ‘ape’ in R [80]. Multivariate trait Euclidean distances were computed on the standardized size-corrected
         residuals of the acoustic parameters using the ‘dist’ function from the package ‘stats’
         in R (standardization was applied to give equal weight to all parameters).
      
      The standard deviate of Moran’s autocorrelation coefficient [37] was computed using the ‘moran.test’ function from package ‘spdep’ in R [81]. Statistical significance was assessed by Monte-Carlo simulations using the ‘moran.mc’
         function from the package ‘spdep’. 10,000 permutations were conducted in each case.
         Geary’s C was computed in the same way using the functions ‘geary.test’ and ‘geary.mc’,
         respectively, from the package ‘spdep’. To confirm our analyses on Abouheif’s proximities
         conducted with the function ‘moran.test’, we used the function ‘abouheif.moran’ from
         the package ‘adephylo’ in R [79], and obtained nearly identical results (within rounding error).
      
      Blomberg’s K was computed using the function ‘phylosig’ from the package ‘phytools’ in R [82]. 10,000 permutations were conducted for significance tests.
      
      Mantel tests were conducted using the ‘mantel’ function from the package ‘ecodist’
         in R [83]. 10,000 permutations were conducted for significance tests. To determine the best
         fit for multivariate trait Euclidean distances, a forward stepwise procedure was conducted
         in which an acoustic parameter was added to the multivariate trait distance model
         only if the Mantel correlation coefficient obtained on this distance model was significantly
         higher than the Mantel correlation coefficient obtained on a trait distance model
         that did not include this parameter. Because there is no formal test of significance
         to compare two Mantel correlation coefficients, we used confidence intervals as estimated
         by bootstrapping (the confidence intervals were also estimated with the ‘mantel’ function
         from the package ‘ecodist’). A given Mantel coefficient ‘A’ was considered as significantly
         higher than a coefficient ‘B’ when the value of ‘A’ was higher than 95% of the values
         of ‘B’ obtained on 10,000 bootstrapping iterations. Note that, to avoid over-fitting,
         the forward stepwise procedure was only conducted on the entire sample (90 species
         for the data presented in Table&nbsp;1, and 49 species for the data presented in Table&nbsp;2) and not on individual clades.
      
   

