Methods
   
      Data collection and generation
      Proteomes of all bacteria were downloaded from NCBI ftp (http://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria/all.faa.tar.gz webcite). The proteomes of S. pneumoniae strain 70585 and Escherichia coli uropathogenic strain CFT073 were collected from above proteomes. Human proteome sequences
         were downloaded from the EBI ftp site (http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/integr8/fasta/proteomes webcite) for prediction of human homologs in PVCs. For the development of web server, standalone
         version of four softwares (Additional file 
         					2: Figure S1), NCBI BLAST (http://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/executables/blast+/LATEST/ webcite), PSORTb 3.0 (http://www.psort.org/psortb/ webcite), HMMTOP 2.0 (http://www.enzim.hu/hmmtop/ webcite) and HMMER 3.0 (http://hmmer.janelia.org/ webcite) were downloaded from their respective websites. PSORTb 3.0 predicts subcellular
         localization of a given protein sequence based on its amino acid composition, similarity
         to proteins of known localization, and presence of different motifs and signal peptides
         
         					[40]. HMMTOP software uses hidden Markov model (HMM) to predict transmembrane helices
         based on the difference in the amino acid distributions in various structural parts
         of proteins 
         					[41]. For prediction of domains in protein sequences, Perl program, pfam_scan.pl and Pfam
         library of HMMs for protein families were downloaded from Pfam website (http://pfam.janelia.org/ webcite).
      
      For prediction of immunogenic regions in PVCs, experimentally known immunogenic epitope
         sequences of all T-cell epitope (TCE) and B-cell epitope (BCE) assays were downloaded
         from IEDB (http://www.iedb.org/ webcite) in CSV format. Peptide epitope with literature reference, epitope ID, GI of source
         protein, and source and host organism’s information were extracted from these TCEs
         and BCEs assays. In case of TCEs, MHCs allele names were also extracted. All epitope
         sequences were stored in ‘fasta’ format for comparison against PVCs. For discontinuous
         BCEs, corresponding protein sequences were downloaded from database, and stretch of
         continuous sub-part protein sequences containing all the residues of discontinuous
         epitope positions was extracted. These subsequences (epitopes) were also stored in
         ‘fasta’ format for comparison against predicted PVCs.
      
      Collection of data for web server validation
      Experimentally known protective antigens were collected from four diverse sources
         to evaluate the performance of Jenner-Predict server against existing methods. Known
         non-cytosolic protective PVCs from the two pathogenic bacteria, S. pneumoniae (gram-positive) and E. coli (gram-negative) were collected from literature. Different experiments had identified
         18 and 28 non-cytosolic proteins to be protective antigens for S. pneumoniae and E. coli, respectively (Additional file 
         					1: Table S1 and Additional file 
         					5: Table S2). To demonstrate effectiveness of the web server in predicting vaccine
         candidates across bacteria, non-cytosolic protective antigens sequences reported in
         ‘Protegen’ database 
         					[46] were retrieved for evaluation as well. Out of the 257 reported bacterial protective
         PVCs in Protegen database, 211 were predicted to be non-cytosolic by PSORTb 3.0. After
         removing 11 antigens having more than 2 trans-membrane helices and sequences which
         are 90 percent identical among themselves by using CD-HIT (http://weizhong-lab.ucsd.edu/cd-hit/ref.php webcite), 177 bacterial protective PVCs were selected for evaluation. In addition to above,
         non-cytosolic proteins from datasets used for VaxiJen 
         					[16] server development were also taken for evaluation. Positive and negative training
         and test datasets containing 100 sequences of each in the form of Swiss-Prot IDs were
         collected and then their sequences were retrieved. PSORTb was used to predict their
         localization and only non-cytosolic proteins were retained. Finally, 83 and 33 non-cytosolic
         positive (protective antigen) and negative (non-antigen) sequences were selected for
         comparison of performances. The sequences used for validation in both Protegen and
         VaxiJen datasets are highly diverse (more than 90% sequences are less than 40% identical).
      
      Server architecture
      The web server comprised of a client interface and a main application program. The
         client interface was developed using HTML language which takes input either in the
         form of protein sequence(s) in fasta format or a proteome of listed bacteria. The
         submitted fasta sequence(s)/proteome are processed by the in-house backend Perl-CGI
         script which posts information provided by the user to the main application program
         in a queue. This Perl-CGI script generates an URL link where the status information
         or output of a given job will be available. The self developed programs and other
         available standalone software (Figure&nbsp;
         					1) are used by ‘main application’ program for the analysis of protein sequences one
         after another to predict PVCs. The main application program also provides the output
         table as prioritized PVCs.
      
      Pfam domain identification
      Domains are basic building blocks of proteins. Searching of a protein sequence against
         Pfam library of HMMs enables to find domain architecture present in that protein 
         					[42]. The Pfam has been used in several genome projects including human for large scale
         functional annotation of genomic data 
         					[55]. A list called, ‘Master list’, was prepared which contains Pfam IDs (domain) from
         the functional classes of proteins involved in host-pathogen interactions and pathogenesis
         
         					[19-28]. For preparing the list, Pfam database was subjected to text search with individual
         key words ‘adhesin’, ‘choline binding protein’, ‘bacterial extracellular solute-binding
         protein’, ‘porin’, ‘invasin’, ‘fibronectin-binding protein’, ‘transferrin-binding
         protein’, ‘virulence’, ‘penicillin-binding protein’, ‘flagellin’, ‘colonization’,
         ‘host-pathogen interaction’ and ‘toxin’ to identify domains from each classes of proteins.
         Then all hits of domains from each keyword were manually checked for their possible
         role in host-pathogen interactions. Only those families/domains were included in the
         ‘Master list’ which have significant functional role in host-pathogen interactions
         and/or pathogenesis (Table&nbsp;
         					2). This ‘Master list’ of domains was used for the prediction of PVCs from non-cytosolic
         proteins.
      
      Figure 2. Sample output of Jenner-Predict server.
      Implementation
      The server, Jenner-Predict, has two major components: PVCs prediction and analysis
         of their vaccine potential (Figure&nbsp;
         					1 and Additional file 
         					1: Figure S1). In first component, software PSORTb 3.0 
         					[40] and HMMTOP 2.0 
         					[41] are used to predict subcellular localization and number of transmembrane helices,
         respectively. The former discards cytoplasmic proteins whereas the latter rejects
         proteins having more than two transmembrane helices 
         					[5]. Proteins passing through the above two filters are then subjected to Pfam domain/family
         search to determine their domains. Finally, role of identified domains in host pathogen
         interaction and pathogenesis is checked according to its presence in ‘Master list’
         (described in ‘Pfam Domain Identification’ subsection and Table&nbsp;
         					2). Proteins having domains/families matching with Pfam domains/families listed in
         the ‘Master list’ are selected as PVCs.
      
      Table 2. Key words used and selection of Pfam domains for protein vaccine candidate prediction
      In second component, vaccine potential of the predicted PVCs’ is performed by taking
         three different measures into account (Figure&nbsp;
         					1): immunogenicity, autoimmunity and conservation. Immunogenic potential (putative
         immunogenic regions in terms of BCEs and TCEs) of PVCs is predicted by exactly matching
         of IEDB epitopes (Refer ‘data collection and generation’ subsection) against the PVCs
         by using standalone BLAST with minimum matching length of 9 
         					[56] and 80% identity cut-off. For autoimmunity prediction, the BLAST is used to find
         similarity between PVCs and human proteins by two different methods: i) cut-off of
         35% identity in at least 80 amino acids length of PVC 
         					[57], and ii) continuous identical matching of 9 or more positions in the alignment 
         					[56]. BLAST is also used to identify conservation of PVCs in different pathogenic strains
         of a given organism. The PVC is compared against different strains of the same organism
         with a cut-off greater than 85 percent sequence identity with minimum of 90% query
         coverage. To determine conservation of PVC in pathogenic and non-pathogenic strains
         separately, names of pathogenic and non-pathogenic strains of each organism are stored
         in two separate flat files under each category. Information on pathogenic or non-pathogenic
         strains of each individual organism is extracted from the respective files.
      
      Output
      The server, Jenner-Predict, has been designed for easy submission of a job as well
         as user-friendly interpretation of results. Just after job submission, an URL link
         is generated which the user may bookmark for tracking the jobs status which is processed
         in a queue. Once a job has been completed, the output is provided in a tabular format
         and a sample output is represented in Figure&nbsp;
         					2. The information provided in different columns are as follows: 1. Sr. No.; 2. Gene
         Id; 3. Localization; 4. No. of transmembrane helices; 5. Pfam domain ID; 6. No. of
         IEDB TCE(s) match(s); 7. No. of IEDB BCE(s) match(s) (Hyperlinks on 6 and 7 showing
         details of matching epitopes); 8. and 9. Autoimmunity information through 35% identical
         matches in 80 AA lengths, and No. of continuous 9-mer identical match in an alignment,
         respectively; and 10. Conservation in number of strains of an organism in the form
         of x/y/z: x. all (pathogenic and non-pathogenic)/, y. pathogenic/, z. non-pathogenic.
      
   

