Methods
   
      Reagents and buffers
      PBS (phosphate buffered saline), Tween 20, 4-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP) and goat
         antibodies to human IgMs were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich; bovine serum albumin (BSA)
         from Roche; low-fat milk powder from Regilait; Maxisorp ELISA plates from NUNC. Buffer
         A contained 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS; buffer B, 5% (w/v) low-fat milk powder in buffer
         A; buffer C, 1% (w/v) low-fat milk powder in buffer A; buffer D, 10% diethanolamine,
         pH&nbsp;9.8, 10&nbsp;mM MgSO4, 20 μM ZnCl2.
      
      Bacterial, plasmid and viral strains
      The plasmids encoding the H6-ED3-PhoA hybrids have been described [41]. Table&nbsp;1 gives the origin of the viral ED3 domain and the corresponding segment of the envelope
         protein. Table&nbsp;2 gives the number of residue changes between the ED3 domains of any two DENV serotypes,
         and also between the ED3 domain of any DENV serotype and the consensus ED3 domain
         (DENVc) [63,64]. The productions of the H6-ED3-PhoA hybrids in the periplasmic space of E. coli and their purification from periplasmic extracts through their His-tag were performed
         essentially as described [41]. The fractions of purification were analyzed by SDS-PAGE in reducing conditions.
         The purest fractions were pooled, snap-frozen and kept at −80°C. They were homogeneous
         at &gt;95%.
      
      Table 1. Viral origins of the (H6-ED3-PhoA)2 dimers
      Table 2. Number of residue changes between ED3 domains of different serotypes
      Clinical samples
      A first set of human serums (Group 1) was collected within the normal activity of
         the National Reference Center (NRC) for Arboviruses, Institut Pasteur de la Guyane,
         French Guiana. These serums were collected from patients who displayed clinical symptoms
         of dengue and whose infection by DENV was confirmed by laboratory methods. A second
         set of human serums (Group 2) was collected in the context of a clinical study (DENFRAME
         project) that was performed in French Guiana [65]. These serums were collected from patients who displayed clinical symptoms of dengue
         but were diagnosed as negative for DENV infection. In the following, we designate
         these serums as DENV-uninfected serums. Both Group 1 and Group 2 serums consisted
         of a series of blood samples collected for the first one during the viremic phase
         of the disease (from day 0 to day 4 after fever onset) and for a second one during
         the early convalescent phase (day 5 or later). The samples were characterized by standard
         diagnostic methods that included virus isolation on mosquito cells and/or viral RNA
         detection by RT-PCR, non-structural NS1 protein detection, as well as MAC-ELISA and
         IgG-specific indirect ELISA using virus-infected suckling mouse brain (SMB) extracts
         as antigens. For the serums of Group 1, the DENV serotype that was responsible for
         the disease, was identified by RT-PCR and the presence of IgMs against the infecting
         DENV serotype was ascertained from a MAC-ELISA that used the corresponding SMB extract
         as antigen. None of the serums was infected simultaneously by two or more DENV serotypes.
         The serums of Group 1 scored as positive for IgG to DENV in an indirect ELISA performed
         on an additional sample collected during the convalescent phase of the disease (day
         15 or later). For the serums of Group 2, all the tests were negative. The methodologies
         for the collection of the serum samples, the collection of the associated clinical
         data, and the characterization of the serums have been described previously in detail
         [65]. Data on the primary or secondary nature of the infection were not available. We
         obtained informed consent from the patients for the use of the Group 2 serum samples
         in a previous clinical study, as described [65]. The constitution of the above human serum collections (Group 1 and Group 2) and
         their use for the present study were approved by the Institutional Review Board of
         Institut Pasteur and a regional ethical committee (Comité de Protection des Personnes,
         Ile-de-France 1).
      
      MAC-ELISA
      The MAC-ELISAs of the present study were performed in 96-well flat-bottom microtiter
         plates with a volume of 100 μL/well. The plates were sensitized with antibodies to
         human IgMs as follows. A goat antibody to human IgMs (1.0 μg/mL in PBS) was loaded
         in the wells of the plate. The plate was incubated overnight at 4°C for the reaction
         of adsorption. The wells were washed with buffer A (three times), blocked with buffer
         B for 1&nbsp;h at 37°C, and then washed as above. The serums and recombinant antigens were
         diluted in buffer C. The serums were diluted 100-fold, a dilution at which they nearly
         saturate the IgM binding sites in the sensitized wells [66]. Wells were loaded with the diluted serums or with buffer C as a blank sample, and
         the plate was incubated for 1&nbsp;h at 37°C for the reaction of antibody capture. The
         wells were washed as above and then loaded with the solution of recombinant antigen.
         The plate was incubated for 1&nbsp;h at 37°C for the binding reaction. The wells were washed
         as above and the bound antigen, (H6-ED3-PhoA)2, was detected by addition of 5&nbsp;mM pNPP in buffer D and measurement of A405nm after 3&nbsp;h at 25°C. Each experimental data point was performed at least in duplicate
         and the corresponding signals were averaged. The serum specific signal was obtained
         by subtracting the signal of the blank sample from the signal of the serum sample.
      
      Analysis of the experimental data
      The curve fits were performed with Kaleidagraph (Synergy Software), which gives Pearson’s
         coefficient of correlation, RP. The mean values, standard deviations (SD) and standard errors (SE) were calculated
         with the same program. The results of the MAC-ELISAs were analyzed through ROC curves,
         which are equivalent to Wilcoxon statistics [67,68]. A ROC curve relates the False Positive Fraction (FPF = 1 - specificity) to the True
         Positive Fraction (sensitivity) of a test when the threshold varies. The area under
         the ROC curve (AUC) is an unbiased measure of the test accuracy and the difference
         AUC - 0.5 is the discrimination power or more simply discrimination of the test. An
         AUC value of 1.0 represents a perfect test whereas a value of 0.5 represents a worthless
         test. A rough guide for classifying the accuracy of a test has been proposed: 0.90-1.0 = excellent,
         0.80-0.90 = good, 0.70-0.80 = fair, 0.60-0.70 = poor, 0.50-0.60 = fail. Semi-parametric
         ROC curves were computed with the LABROC4 program [69] as implemented in the Web based calculator JLABROC4 [70].
      
   

