Methods
   
      A conceptual review of institutionalization in psychiatry was conducted. To synthesize
         concepts of the phenomenon ‘institutionalization’, the principles of conceptual reviews
         as described by Lilford et al. 
         				[14] were followed. Unlike a standard systematic review, the aim of a conceptual review
         is not to review all literature but to search widely using various databases and sources;
         building in safety nets to minimize potential biases (e.g. multidisciplinary study
         teams) and incorporating some overlap in the various stages of the review process
         so that the precise direction of the review can be clarified. For the purpose of this
         paper, the concept of institutionalization described by Erving Goffman in 1961 
         				[1] was selected as the starting point to the diverse and extensive literature because
         Goffman’s definition of psychiatric hospitals as ‘total institutions’ was influential
         and still remains strongly in the minds of sociologists, psychiatrists, and service
         user advocates 
         				[15].
      
      To commence, electronic searches were performed and the literature known to the authors
         was also considered. The databases searched were: Pubmed, Web of Science, PsychINFO,
         and Scopus as they are widely considered as the most relevant databases for publications
         in the fields of psychology, psychiatry, and other medical disciplines. For each database,
         searches were performed using the term “institution* AND severe mentally ill*”, seeking
         for all literature since Goffman’s work on mental institutions from January 1961 to
         February 2012. This was later supplemented through additional searches using more
         psychiatric institutionalization specific terms: (psychiatr* institutionalization
         AND mental illness) and (mental institution* AND psychiatr*). The titles and abstracts
         of all identified papers were then reviewed for their relevance. To search widely,
         the reference lists of all identified relevant papers were also examined to uncover
         new potential references that were not included in the selected databases. Therefore,
         although the focus of the review is on the field of psychiatry, some papers also tap
         into other disciplines such as history, law and sociology if there was a direct link
         to psychiatry found in the papers by the authors. Full papers were read if necessary
         to determine their significance before discarding. The concepts uncovered from an
         initial search of the literature guided further more specific searches around those
         concepts.
      
      Identified articles were eligible for this study if they met at least one of the following
         two inclusion criteria: A) mentioning the characteristics, experiences, and/or the
         functions of adult psychiatric institutions and institutionalization, B) reporting
         the effect of institutionalization. However, only those papers were included that
         did not meet any of the following two exclusion criteria: First, papers were excluded
         if studies about psychiatric hospitals were not based in countries that had experienced
         major mental health care reforms involving deinstitutionalization during the second
         half of the 20th century. The reason for excluding such papers is because countries that had not undergone
         the process of deinstitutionalization at the time may operate on a different organization
         of mental health care system 
         				[16]. Second, papers were excluded if studies focus mostly on psychiatric reforms or the
         process of deinstitutionalization. Third, papers were also excluded if institutionalization
         of older adults, children or intellectually disabled were examined, since the review
         focused on the concept of institutionalization for the core group of patients of working
         age.
      
      Thematic analysis, a method used for identifying patterns of meaning, was employed
         to synthesize the findings 
         				[17]. Information on the characteristics and functions of psychiatric institutions was
         extracted from all identified papers and was then analysed in chronological order.
         This analytic approach was chosen in order to reflect historical trends in the development
         of psychiatric services. Analysis was regularly reviewed through weekly meetings between
         WSC and SP, and findings were then presented to the study team and alternative interpretations
         discussed, in order to minimize any potential biases. Identified categories were then
         refined, subsumed within existing categories or deleted. The study team comprised
         a clinical psychiatrist (SD), a research psychologist (RMcC), a psychiatrist who is
         both a clinician and an academic (SP), and a public health researcher who is also
         trained as a mental health clinician (WSC). The team drew on their professional experience
         in various clinical settings, background knowledge of different countries’ health
         care systems and familiarity with conducting conceptual reviews. The study group was
         asked to comment on the preliminary themes, the initial draft of this review and to
         identify any further relevant literature that was not included. The study team’s expertise
         was utilized to identify patterns as well as to combine related subject matters through
         discussions. Findings were then grouped based on the underlying concepts which appeared
         to guide them. The discussions with the study team provided a validity check on the
         identified themes.
      
   

