Methods
   
      Animals were treated according to the Directive 2010/63/UE of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of 22 September 2010 on the protection of animals used for experimentation
         and other scientific purposes. All experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional
         Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Santiago de Compostela (Spain).
      
      Sanger sequencing
      Experimental design and samplings
      The E. scophthalmi infection trial was performed at the facilities of CETGA (Centro Tecnológico Gallego
         de Acuicultura; NW Spain). Naïve turbot (8484 recipients = R and 8484 controls = C)
         from a balanced mixture of five unrelated families with known pedigree, hatched and
         reared at a commercial fish farm were sent to CETGA facilities and acclimated to experimental
         conditions for 10&nbsp;days before the beginning of the experiment. R and C fish were kept
         in separate tanks (7 tanks for each group) in two separated recirculating systems,
         with constant water temperature (19–20°C) and fed with commercial dried pellets. R
         fish were infected by oral intubation with intestinal scrapings containing E. scophthalmi stages obtained from infected turbot, for two consecutive days. C fish were maintained
         under equivalent conditions as R fish, but intubated with PBS instead. More details
         on this procedure can be found in a previous work [112].
      
      The progression of the infection was monitored by sampling both C and R groups at
         different times post inoculation (p.i.). The prevalence of infection at each sampling
         point was obtained by detecting positive fish by either PCR or histology in any of
         the organs examined. At each sampling point, 14 fish from each group were sized, weighed
         and euthanized by over-exposure to benzocaine (3-aminobenzoic acid ethyl ester, 100
         mg L-1, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). The resulting prevalence of infection was 0, 7.1,
         28.6, 85.7 and 92.9% at 4, 7, 14, 25 and 34&nbsp;days p.i, respectively. No C fish was
         found to be infected.
      
      Samples of spleen, head kidney, thymus, liver and pyloric caeca were rapidly dissected,
         immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until used for RNA extraction.
         At each sampling time, samples of each tissue from the different individual fish from
         each group (C, R) were pooled. The serial times of sampling provided tissues expressing
         different genes related to immune response from initial until late states of the infection.
      
      RNA isolation, library preparation and sequence analysis
      RNA extraction of samples from control and infected fish, cDNA library construction
         and sequencing were performed as described elsewhere [36]. Briefly, RNA was extracted using TRIZOL Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
         Poly-A mRNA was isolated using the Dynabeads® mRNA Purification Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
         CA, USA). The two cDNA libraries (control and infected) were directionally constructed
         (5′EcoRI, 3′XhoI), with equal amounts of RNA from each tissue at each sampling time, using the ZAP-cDNA
         Library Construction Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA), except size fractioning
         that was performed with the SizeSep 400 Spun Columns (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden).
         Plasmid DNA was isolated from approximately 4,000 clones from each library using the
         DirectPrep® 96 Miniprep kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA). Plasmid DNA was sequenced
         following the ABI Prism BigDye™ Teminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit protocol on an
         ABI 3100 DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). All clones were
         sequenced from their 3′ ends using a standard T7 primer to obtain the highest specific gene sequences for
         oligo-microarray design. Those clones that suffered a systematic drop on sequencing
         signal after poly-A tails were sequenced from the 5′ end. Basecalling from chromatogram traces was performed by using PHRED [113,114].
      
      454 pyrosequencing run
      Reproductive tissue sampling and RNA extraction
      A total of 30 turbot samples were collected from CETGA from a mixture of unrelated
         genetic families. In order to obtain the widest possible range of expressed transcript
         sub-sets, tissues were dissected in fish at different stages of gonad development.
         The number, age and the mean values of biometry (standard length and body weight)
         for each animal group were the following: undifferentiated animals (n = 5; 90&nbsp;days
         post hatch [dph], 5.2 ± 0.6&nbsp;cm, 2.9 ± 0.9&nbsp;g); differentiating animals (n = 4; 150
         dph, 9.8 ± 1.3&nbsp;cm, 21.8 ± 9.5&nbsp;g); male juveniles (n = 4; 400 dph, 20.9 ± 4.2&nbsp;cm, 195.0
         ± 123.0&nbsp;g); female juveniles (n = 5; 450 dph, 23.4 ± 3.6&nbsp;cm, 264.1 ± 93.4&nbsp;g); male
         broodstock (n = 3; 900 dph, 44.8 ± 3.6&nbsp;cm, 2,059.0 ± 591.6&nbsp;g) and female broodstock
         (n = 3; 900 dph, 47.7 ± 6.4&nbsp;cm, 2,834.3 ± 1,264.9&nbsp;g). Brain and hypophysis from broodstock
         animals were also dissected and rapidly flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Gonads were
         fully isolated in adult and juvenile fish and thus gonadal tissue was devoid of any
         other tissue. However, gonads of sexually differentiating fish contained a bit of
         attached epithelium. Due to their extremely small size, the isolation of the gonads
         alone was not feasible and thus samples contained also portions of the surrounding
         tissues.
      
      RNA was individually extracted by RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following
         the manufacturer’s instructions. Quantity was determined using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer
         (Nanodrop Technologies, US). The RNA integrity number (RIN) was determined in an Agilent
         BioAnalizer (Agilent Technologies, US). RNA samples with a RIN &gt; 8.1 were further
         processed for the sequencing run. A pooled sample was generated by mixing 70% of gonads
         containing equal amounts of RNA from each individual and 30% of equal amount of RNA
         from broodstock brains and hypophysis tissues.
      
      cDNA library, normalization and 454 FLX Titanium pyrosequencing
      Full-length-enriched double stranded cDNA was synthesized from 1.5&nbsp;μg of pooled total
         RNA using the MINT cDNA synthesis kit (Evrogen, Moscow, Russia) according to the manufacturer’s
         protocol, and was subsequently purified using the QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen
         USA, Valencia, CA). The amplified cDNA was normalized using the Trimmer kit (Evrogen,
         Moscow, Russia) to minimize differences in representation of transcripts [115,116]. The single-stranded cDNA fraction was then amplified twice by sequential PCR reactions
         according to manufacturer’s protocol. Normalized cDNA was purified using the QIAquick
         PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen USA, Valencia, CA). Normalized cDNA (5&nbsp;μg) was used to
         generate a 454 library. cDNA was fractionated into small, 300 to 800&nbsp;bp fragments
         and the specific A and B adaptors were ligated to both the 3′ and 5′ ends of the fragments and used for purification, amplification, and sequencing steps.
         Two and a quarter PTP regions were used for the GS-FLX sequencing run using Titanium
         chemistry. All reagents and protocols were from Roche 454 Life Sciences, USA. 454
         data was processed with Roche’s software, using default settings, to obtain fasta
         and quality files containing the trimmed sequence of all reads [117]. Contigs with at least 100&nbsp;bp were recovered. Sequences were de novo assembled into contigs by running Mira v3.2.0rc1 in EST mode. Contigs less than 100&nbsp;bp were filtered out and the rest was blasted against
         D. rerio RefSeq protein sequences with est2assembly’s analyse_assembly.pl script [118] in order to validate the whole process.
      
      Turbot databases
      Bioinformatic tools were developed to process all sequencing data obtained from both
         Sanger and 454 FLX Titanium technologies. The starting point of the current work was
         the Turbot 1 database, which was reported previously [36]. In order to generate the Turbot 2 database sequences of Turbot 1 database (9,873)
         were clustered with: 3,043 sequences obtained from the E. scophthalmi trial cDNA libraries, 1,371 genomic sequences from enriched DNA libraries [51] and 3,339 sequences available in public databases [52], using CAP3 software (http://seq.cs.iastate.edu/ webcite) (Table&nbsp;1). The resulting “.ace” file was used to study coverage and construct user-friendly
         alignment views with Mview [119]. To construct the Turbot 3 database, the primitive sequences of Turbot 2 (17,626)
         were pooled with the 454 contigs (65,472) and then clustered using CAP3 software.
         The resulting contigs and singletons were annotated using AutoFact (http://www.bch.umontreal.ca/Software/AutoFACT.htm webcite), BLASTN and BLASTX with databases nr, UniProt, UniRef, COG, KEGG, PFam, LSU and
         SSU. Results were uploaded to a MySQL database and a portal web was created.
      
      To study the different pathways found in the Turbot 3 database the DAVID web tool
         was used [120,121]. After the selection of the pathways of interest, a list of reference genes was downloaded
         from the NCBI RefSeq database and BLASTed against the Turbot 3 database. A gene was
         considered present in our database if its reference sequence had a match with an e-value
         cut off ≤ 1,00E-5 and hit length ≥50. To make the colour pathway diagrams (Additional
         file 2 and Additional file 4) the KEGG mapper tool http://www.genome.jp/kegg/tool/map_pathway2.html webcite was used [122,123]. Due to the lack of a D. rerio Chemokine signaling pathway in KEGG website the human version was used for Additional
         file 2. In Additional file 4, the Progesterone-mediated oocyte maturation pathway from D. rerio given by KEGG website is labeled as Xenopus oocyte. This label is kept in the figure.
      
      Microsatellites and SNPs
      For SSR and SNP detection, EST sequences were clustered with CAP3 using default parameters
         and the resulting “.ace” format assembly file was fed into the corresponding programs.
         The set of unique sequences was searched for microsatellites using the SPUTNIK program
         (http://espressosoftware.com/sputnik/ webcite). The minimum repeat number used for this search was six for dinucleotide and four
         for tri-, tetra- and pentanucleotide microsatellites. Microsatellite-containing ESTs
         were identified as candidates for marker development if they presented enough flanking
         sequences on either side of the repeats for primer design. Whenever possible, we selected
         three putative primers using the Primer3 software (http://frodo.wi.mit.edu/primer3/ webcite).
      
      SNP detection was performed with contigs of at least four sequences using the QualitySNP
         program (http://www.bioinformatics.nl/tools/snpweb/ webcite). This program uses three filters for the identification of reliable SNPs (see [92] for details). SNPs that pass filters 1 and 2 are called real SNPs and those passing
         all filters are called true SNPs. The resulting files were processed with our own
         custom Perl programs to extract relevant information. The obtained true SNPs were
         imported into a MySQL database (http://www.mysql.com webcite). A user-friendly web access interface was designed so that contig graphs are clickable
         and the output visually refined with color-coded nucleotide views (http://bio-mview.sourceforge.net/ webcite). A graphical interface allowing for SNP database search by alleles, contig depth,
         and annotation was also established in our on line database. Searchable chromatograms
         for each of the Sanger sequences making up each contig were also included. It should
         be emphasized that SNPs detected with the help of bioinformatic pipelines are only
         putative and they should be technically validated.
      
      To ensure identification of new molecular markers, sequences similar to GenBank deposited
         sequences were filtered out to avoid identification of already known SSR and SNP sequences,
         especially the ones previously identified by turbot [18,19,48,51,94,124,125].
      
      Pilot-microarray platform
      A custom 2 x 105 K array was printed with turbot sequences from the Turbot 3 database
         by Agilent Technologies (US). In order to study the orientation of the non-annotated
         sequences and their possible gene expression, false annotation of genes and identify
         possible NATs, oligos were designed in both orientations, forward and reverse. Oligo
         design was done by using Repeat Masker to eliminate low-complexity regions, and then
         OligoArray 2.1 software to do the design itself [126]. Cross-hybridization between oligos was checked by BLAST searches against the entire
         Turbot 3 database and oligos with ≥ 3 putative cross-hybridizations were removed.
         A total number of 96,292 oligos were printed and almost half of the array contained
         oligos (47,291) also designed with the opposite orientation. This pilot microarray
         also included all default positive and negative controls defined by the company (1,325
         spots).
      
      Microarray hybridization
      The same samples of immune tissues used for library construction and Sanger sequencing
         and those from the brain-pituitary-gonad axis used for 454 sequencing were used for
         hybridization (in duplicate) with the pilot microarray. A total of four microarrays
         were used, two for the reproductive system and two for the immune system. Hybridizations
         were performed at the Universidad de Santiago de Compostela (USC) Functional Genomics
         Platform by the Agilent Technology Gene Expression Unit using a 1-colour labeling
         protocol. This method demonstrated very similar performances to the 2-colour protocol
         [97,127]. Briefly, 50&nbsp;ng of total RNA were labelled using the Low Input Quick Amp Labeling
         Kit, One-Color (Cy3) (Agilent Technologies, USA). cRNA was prepared for overnight
         hybridization with the corresponding buffers during 17&nbsp;h at 65°C and washed on the
         following day. Hybridized slides were scanned using an Agilent G2565B microarray scanner
         (Agilent Technologies, USA).
      
      Pilot microarray data processing, filtration, and identification of NATs
      The hybridization signal was captured and processed using an Agilent scanner (G2565B,
         Agilent Technologies, USA). The scanner images were segmented with the Agilent Feature
         Extraction Software (v9.5) using protocol GE1-v5_95. Extended dynamic range implemented
         in the Agilent software was applied to avoid saturation in the highest intensity range.
         Agilent feature extraction produced the raw data for further pre-processing. The processed
         signal (gProcessed-Signal) value was chosen as statistical for the absolute hybridization
         signal.
      
      The filtration process was made in two steps. First, the features which did not conform
         with any of the following well established quality criteria were filtered: (1) non-uniform
         pixel distributed outliers and population replicate outliers according to the default
         Agilent feature extraction criteria; (2) features whose ratio between processed signal
         and their error was below 2; (3) spots not differentiated from background signal (as
         estimated for each spot); (4) features below the limit where the linear relationship
         between concentration and intensity was lost according to Spike-In information. The
         numbers of oligos filtered using this first step is shown in Table&nbsp;10. Second, two additional filtering criteria were applied: (5) only features with intensity
         ≥ 100 fluorescence units were kept; (6) features likely to present cross-hybridization
         were filtered. Table&nbsp;10 shows the numbers of oligos filtered using the complete filtration process.
      
      For miRNA identification in the Turbot 3 database, a BLASTN search against the miRBase
         v.18 database (http://www.mirbase.org/ webcite) was used. The ten best matches were selected and are depicted in Table&nbsp;11.
      
      Statistical analyses were carried out with the statistical language R (2.13.1 version).
         The GOStats Bioconductor package (version 2.18) was used to perform the analysis of
         GO Terms.
      
   

