Methods
   
      Isle of Wight study
      Study population and characteristics
      A whole population birth cohort was established on the Isle of Wight, UK, in 1989
         to prospectively study the natural history of allergic diseases from birth to 18&nbsp;years
         of age. The island is close to the British mainland, semi-rural, and without heavy
         industry. Both the Isle of Wight and the study population are 99% Caucasian. Ethics
         approvals were obtained from the Isle of Wight Local Research Ethics Committee (now
         named the National Research Ethics Service, NRES Committee South Central – Southampton
         B) at recruitment and for the 1, 2, 4, 10 and 18&nbsp;years follow-up (06/Q1701/34). Of
         the 1,536 children born between January 1, 1989, and February 28, 1990, written informed
         consent was obtained from parents to enrol 1,456 newborns. Children were followed
         up at the ages of 1 (n = 1,167), 2 (n = 1,174), 4 (n = 1,218), 10 (n = 1,373), and
         18&nbsp;years (n = 1,313). Detailed questionnaires were completed for each child at each
         follow-up. When a visit was not possible, a telephone questionnaire was completed
         or a postal questionnaire sent for completion and return.
      
      In all assessments of the Isle of Wight birth cohort, eczema was defined as chronic
         or chronically relapsing, itchy dermatitis lasting more than 6&nbsp;weeks with characteristic
         morphology and distribution [23], following Hanifin and Rajka criteria [24]. Since the 1-year and 2-year follow-up data on eczema were collected in a relatively
         small time window, we combined them for analytic purposes (reported as 1-or-2&nbsp;years).
      
      Genotyping
      DNA was extracted from blood or saliva samples from IOW cohort subjects (n = 1,211).
         Seven SNPs in the IL13 gene were selected for genotyping using a tagging strategy implemented in Haploview
         using HapMap Caucasian data (Hapmap Data PhaseIII/Rel#2, Feb09, on NCBI B36 assembly,
         dbSNP b126) [25]. One SNP in STAT6 was selected for replication purposes. DNA samples were interrogated using GoldenGate
         Genotyping Assays (Illumina, Inc, SanDiego, CA) on the BeadXpress Veracode bead platform
         (Illumina, Inc, SanDiego, CA) per Illumina’s protocol. Data were analyzed using the
         genotyping module of the GenomeStudio Software package (Illumina, Inc, SanDiego, CA).
         DNA from each subject plus 37 replicate samples, genotyped for control purposes, were
         analyzed for a total of 1,248 samples (trios were not available). The quality threshold
         for allele determination across samples was set at a GenCall score &gt;0.25 with n = 1,227
         samples retained for further analysis. Analysis of each locus included reclustering
         of genotyping data using our project data to define genotype cluster positions with
         additional manual reclustering to maximize both cluster separation and the 50th percentile
         of the distribution of the GenCall scores across all genotypes (50% GC score). GenCall
         score is a quality metric of the Illumina GenomeStudio software that indicates the
         reliability of the genotypes called on SNP arrays, with scores ranging from 0.0 to
         1.0. The proprietary algorithm for converting raw allele intensities into genotypes
         considers angle of the clusters, dispersion of clusters, overlap between clusters,
         and intensity. Genotypes with lower GenCall scores are located furthest from the center
         of the cluster. For the analyzed STAT6 and IL13 SNPs the sample call rates were over 95.5%. GenCall scores and other quality metrics
         for SNPs rs20541 and rs1059513 are reported in Additional file 1: Table S1.
      
      Additional file 1: Table S1. Quality control indices for genotyping IL13 rs20541 and STAT6 rs1059513 in the Isle of Wight population and PAPA study population.
         	Format: PDF 
         	Size: 68KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Adobe Acrobat Reader
      Swansea PAPA study
      Study population and characteristics
      PAPA (Poblogaeth Asthma Prifysgol Abertawe, Swansea University Asthma Population) is a cross-sectional population-based study.
         The study group comprised 1,445 unselected Caucasian volunteers (aged 18–30) from
         students and staff at Swansea University and Singleton Hospital, Swansea, United Kingdom.
         Eczema was defined by a positive response to ‘Have you ever had eczema?’ and further
         defined by whether participants currently had symptoms using a validated questionnaire
         [26].
      
      Genotyping
      DNA was extracted from blood samples provided by the PAPA population subjects (n = 1445).
         Eight and seven variants in IL13 and STAT6 genes, respectively, that were reported to be common in populations of European ancestry
         and/or showed potential association with allergic phenotypes were selected for genotyping.
         In order to ensure sufficient heterozygosity in our population, variant selection
         was refined by genotyping a small sample of our population for the selected SNPs of
         interest by automated DNA sequencing (ABI PRISMTM 310 Gene Analyser). Following SNP
         selection, genotyping of selected SNPs was performed by KBioscience (http://www.kbioscience.co.uk webcite) using a fluorescence-based competitive allele-specific PCR system (KASPar). This
         proprietary system has been developed from the Ampliflour system. SNP Call rates were
         over 98% for all variants (Additional file 1: Table S1). A random sample of the population (n = 30) underwent in-house automated
         DNA sequencing (ABI PRISM 310 Gene Analyzer) with results validated against the overall
         genotyping results for the population and results were concordant (trios were not
         available). Randomly selected samples were also analyzed in duplicate by KBioscience
         to provide further validation. Blank cells were included on each 96-well plate (sterile
         water) providing negative controls.
      
      Statistical analysis
      Period prevalence of eczema in the IOW study was determined for each follow-up (1-or-2,
         4, 10, and 18&nbsp;years) by dividing the number of participants with eczema by the total
         number of individuals who participated in the respective follow-up. Similarly, the
         proportion of participants with eczema in the PAPA study was determined. In both studies,
         proportion of individuals with eczema was further stratified by IL13 (rs20541) and STAT6 (rs1059513) SNP genotypes. In this report we limited our analysis to a single SNP
         in each gene due to their known relevance to characteristics of the outcome under-investigation
         (eczema) and their availability in both studies. The STAT6 tagging SNP rs1059513 is the only common SNP in STAT6 that had been genotyped in both studies. In regard to IL13, four SNPs were in common between the two studies, namely rs20541, rs1800925, rs1295685,
         and rs1881457. In both the IOW and PAPA studies the four SNPs are in medium to high
         linkage disequilibrium (D′ values: IOW: 52 – 99; PAPA: 53 – 99; r2 values: IOW: 26 – 97; PAPA: 26 – 99). This observation of elevated linkage disequilibrium
         between SNPs in IL13 gene had been reported previously [17,27]. Due to the moderate to high linkage disequilibrium between the four SNPs we restricted
         our analysis to the functional (non-synonymous) SNP rs20541, which in turn is also
         a proxy of other SNPs in the region. Deviation from Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE)
         was tested by conducting χ2 goodness-of-fit test for genotype frequencies in both study populations. A p-value &lt; 0.05
         was used as an indicator for possible violation of HWE.
      
      Odds ratios are likely to overestimate the risk ratios due to the fact that the prevalence
         of eczema is common (&gt; 10%) in most of the strata used in our analysis [28]. To evaluate associations between SNP genotypes and eczema, log-binomial regression
         was applied to estimate risk ratios (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Exponentiating
         coefficients associated with explanatory variables (i.e., SNP genotypes) estimated
         by log-binomial regression with a log link function allowed us to directly estimate
         RRs [28]. To estimate the overall effect of SNP genotypes on eczema, which was repeatedly
         measured at 1-or-2, 4, 10, and 18&nbsp;years in the IOW study, we applied generalized estimating
         equation (GEE) method [29]. The GEE approach accounts for the correlated observations and the within-child effect
         by employing a covariance matrix solved through an iterative estimating process based
         on a working correlation matrix [29]. Log-binomial models were estimated using the GENMOD procedure in SAS 9.2 (SAS, Gary,
         NC, USA). In all statistical models age and sex were included as potential covariates
         and a p-value &lt; 0.05 was used to indicate statistical significance.
      
      In a first exploratory step, the associations between genotypes of the two SNPs and
         eczema were explored using co-dominant, dominant, recessive, and additive genetic
         models. We applied log-binomial regression models to obtain RRs for eczema relative
         to SNPs in IL13 and STAT6 separately. Although, results of this step are not the focus of this article, controlling
         for false-positive findings was performed using the false discovery rate (FDR) method
         [30]. However, the aim of this study is to test the statistical interaction of the two
         SNPs for the risk of eczema. Therefore, in the discovery study using the IOW cohort,
         log-binomial regression models {RR = exp(β1 × IL13 + β2 × STAT6 + β3 × [IL13 × STAT6])} were conducted to evaluate the statistical interaction between the SNPs of the
         two genes under four genetic models (co-dominant, dominant, recessive, and additive).
         To control for false-positive interactions, the FDR method was applied to obtain adjusted
         p-values associated with the interaction terms. In the replication study, i.e. the
         PAPA study, we only tested the statistical interaction between the two SNPs under
         the genetic model that gained statistical significance in the discovery study. Following
         the concept of replication, no correction for multiple testing was needed in the replication
         study (one model was tested for interaction). The interaction term (β3 × [IL13 × STAT6]) was used to estimate the additional effect of two co-occurring risk factors on
         the health outcome above and beyond their individual effects. The term “combined effect”
         was used to describe the joint impact of two individual risk factors plus their interaction
         on the occurrence of the outcome (eczema). We also applied an alternate approach to
         estimate the combined effect of both risk factors; we compared the risk of eczema
         in individuals who have both risk factors (IL13 and STAT6 risk genotypes) to the risk of individuals who have neither (IL13 and STAT6 wild genotypes). This approach was referred to as the “combined effect – stratification”.
      
   

