Methods
   
      Plant material and phenotyping
      The initial germplasm panel consisted of 192 genotyped barley accessions representing
         a survey of the breeding history of the Mediterranean basin, as well as of NW Europe
         and was described in full by Comadran et al. (2009).
      
      The whole set of accessions was sown in November 2004 in Foradada (Spain, 41°39’N,
         01°29’E) following an augmented cyclical design with an incomplete block size of 60.
         Each incomplete block was planted in 5 rows of 12 columns and included 4 checks, each
         replicated three times with one located in each column in a diagonal fashion at fixed
         intervals. We used four incomplete blocks to sow one of full replicate of all 192
         entries and used a fifth incomplete block with a random selection of 48 entries to
         provide partial replication. The four checks (a local landrace, a local old variety,
         a local modern variety and the improved variety ‘Rihane’) were used to detect and
         correct for any spatial variation across rows and column and the partial replication
         provided an estimate of the trial error. Plots were 6 m2 and were grown according to local management practice in terms of sowing rate, weed
         and disease control, and fertilizer inputs. Minimum and maximum temperatures were
         recorded daily during the growing season (Figure&nbsp;1a). Winter survival was evaluated at the end of March 2005 by visual estimation on
         a 0–5 scale (5 = complete survival), using half-scores when needed, as described in
         Figure&nbsp;1b [34]. The experiment was repeated in the growing season 2007/08 at Fiorenzuola d’Arda
         (Italy, 44°55’N, 9°53’E) but differed in that each entry was sown in plots of two
         1m long rows in a two-replicate randomised complete block design and the same observations
         were recorded. The entries included the cultivars ‘Nure’ (winter) and ‘Tremois’ (spring),
         which have been extensively trialled at the research station of Fiorenzuola d’Arda
         and represent standards of frost tolerance and susceptibility respectively, that can
         therefore be used to judge the severity of stress.
      
      Genotyping
      As four genotypes (‘Hanna’, ‘Pioneer’, ‘Regina’ and ‘Tipper’) were clearly phenotypically
         different from what they were expected to be and two (‘Zephyr’ and a Jordanian landrace)
         were duplicated in the panel, we extracted 186 DNA samples from leaf tissue of two-week-old
         single plants using the DNeasy Plant DNA miniprep kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and
         genotyped them with Barley Oligo Pooled Array 1 (BOPA1, consisting of 1536 SNPs) using
         the Illumina GoldenGate platform [20]. We adopted the genetic map published with the BOPA1 platform as the genetic framework
         for the association analyses [20]. Furthermore, genotypes and SNP markers with more than 10% of missing data and minimum
         allele frequency (MAF) &lt;10% were removed from the dataset and omitted from further
         analyses, leaving a data set for further analysis consisting of 184 accessions (‘Alexis’
         and ‘Tichedrett’ were removed) with genotypic data for 1,307 SNPs. The QMVREPLACE
         procedure, implemented in Genstat v.14 (VSN International), which replaces missing
         marker scores with one scores from the most similar genotype(s), was used to impute
         missing genotypic data, using the default values. The Turkish two-rowed facultative
         line ‘Tokak’ and the elite two-rowed winter line ‘Intro’ are used in the results and
         discussion sections as reference cultivar genotypes with maximum cold tolerance scores
         in our trial conditions.
      
      Statistical analysis and GWA mapping
      DARwin v.5.0 [38] (http://darwin.cirad.fr/ webcite) was used to construct a Neighbour Joining Tree from the genotypes of the 184 barley
         accessions using simple matching of the SNPs. Linkage Disequilibrium and haplotype
         analyses of the positive SNPs in relation to germplasm clusters were performed with
         HAPLOVIEW v.4.2 (http://www.broadinstitute.org/haploview/haploview webcite). Best linear unbiased predictions (BLUPs) of the cold resistance for each accession
         were calculated using the Restricted Maximum Likelihood (REML) directive in Genstat
         v.14 (VSN International). In the model, checks were fitted as a fixed effect, and
         columns, rows and test entries were fitted as random effects. From the variance components
         obtained by REML, repeatability (H2) was estimated as H2 = [σ2g / (σ2g + σ2e)], where σ2e, is the residual variance component and σ2g is the genotypic variance component. The BLUPs for each accession were classified
         according to their geographic origin, growth habit and ear morphology (Additional
         file 4 Table S4), the main drivers of genetic divergence of barley germplasm, and tested
         for significant differences by Analysis of Variance using Genstat v.14 (VSN International).
         Genome Wide Association Scans (GWAS) were carried out by using a mixed linear model
         with terms to account for genetic relatedness due to historical population substructure
         and/or kinship [43]. We therefore used either the Eigenstrat relationship model with PCA scores included
         as a random matrix that approximates kinship [44] or a kinship matrix [43], again as a random term, to correct for population substructure in the association
         mapping routines implemented in Genstat v.14 (VSN International). TASSEL v. 3.0 [45] was used to estimate the kinship matrix (K) from a stratified subset of 631 random
         markers spaced approximately 2cM apart and with unique map positions so that we did
         not over-estimate sub-population divergence. For comparison, we also conducted GWAS
         without any correction for population substructure. In all scans, a threshold of (−log10p ≥ 3) was set for identifying significant SNP associations. Significant SNPs mapping
         within 5 cM of each other were considered as being linked to the same QTL and the
         highest was chosen as representing the QTL.
      
      Additional file 4. Table S4. Germplasm list of the 184 barley lines assembled into the GWAS population providing
         country and region of origin, growth habit, spike morphology and frost tolerance genotypic
         means used in this paper.
         	Format: XLSX 
         	Size: 20KB Download file or  display content in a new window
   

