Methods
   
      Mice were housed under conditions meeting the guidelines issued by the Association
         for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care. All animal protocols were
         approved by the University of Pennsylvania’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
         (IACUC protocol #801832).
      
      Animal processing
      Experiments were performed on male mice (C57BL/6&nbsp;J) 10 +/−1 wk of age. Mice were kept
         in a pathogen-free environment with 12&nbsp;hr:12&nbsp;hr light:dark cycle. Temperature and
         humidity were regulated (22°C and 45–55% respectively). Water was available ad libitum. Food was accessible only during the 12&nbsp;hours of the active period. Animals were
         acclimated to this feeding pattern for 14&nbsp;days prior to the beginning of the deprivation
         and tissue collection protocols. This was done to avoid differential food intake between
         mice that were subsequently sleep deprived during the lights-on period and those allowed
         uninterrupted sleep. This acclimatization period was also used to allow animals to
         become accustomed to the extended presence of an experimenter and repeated gentle
         touching. This likely reduced, but did not fully remove stress resulting from the
         subsequent sleep deprivation procedure. Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation
         following 3, 6, 9, and 12&nbsp;h of total sleep deprivation (n = 8 or 9 at each time point). Deprivation was initiated at lights-on and performed
         through gentle handling. Mice that had been allowed undisturbed sleep were sacrificed
         at the same diurnal time points as sleep-deprived mice. An additional baseline group
         (n = 10) was sacrificed at time zero, i.e., at the time of lights-on at 7:00&nbsp;AM. All
         mice were behaviorally monitored with the AccuScan infrared monitoring system that
         detects movement when the mouse crosses electronic beams (Columbus Instruments). For
         each animal, descriptive statistics such as average activity (beam breaks) for each
         hour (and then averaged across 12&nbsp;h of light and dark) and estimated sleep amounts
         were computed. Sleep was considered to be present when there was 40&nbsp;s or more of continuous
         inactivity. This has been shown previously to provide accurate estimates of sleep
         and wake [76]. In addition, plots of activity and sleep graphed as moving averages broken down
         by light/dark cycle per day were generated for visual inspection. All mice studied
         had normal sleep/wake behavior for this strain at this age.
      
      Tissue sampling, RNA isolation, and microarrays
      The animals were subjected to cervical dislocation followed by tissue collection.
         Total RNA was isolated with TRIzol (Invitrogen-Life, Carlsbad, CA) and further purified
         using RNeasy columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) as recommended by the manufacturer’s instructions.
         Transcript levels were assayed using the GeneChip® Mouse Gene 1.0 ST array (Affymetrix,
         Santa Clara, CA), comprising 28.000 genes. RNA quality and integrity was checked using
         spectrophotometer to access the concentration and purity in ratio of absorbance at
         260&nbsp;nm. A total of 100&nbsp;ng of RNA from each time point from each animal and respectively
         tissue was used to hybridize independents sets of Gene Chip Mouse Gene St 1.0 arrays
         (Affymetrix®, Santa Clara, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol and
         following the best practice and high-standard criteria required. The RNA processing
         and microarrays experimental protocols were performed in the University of Pennsylvania
         Microarray Core Facility. Each sample was analyzed with a single microarray.
      
      Target preparation, including hybridization and post-hybridization procedures, was
         performed as described by the Affymetrix GeneChip Whole-transcriptome Terminal Labeling
         and Controls manual (http://www.affymetrix.com webcite). Each of the 28,853 genes is represented on the array by approximately 27 probes
         spread across the full length of the gene.
      
      Preprocessing and data analysis
      Probe intensity data from all arrays were read into the R software environment (http://www.R-project.org webcite) directly from .cel files using the R/oligo package [77,78]. R/oligo was also used to extract probe level data to assess data quality using intensity
         histograms and boxplots and to create summary measures of expression. Normalization
         was performed using the robust multi-array average (RMA) method to form one expression
         measure for each gene on each array histograms [79]. RMA processing was performed separately for each tissue (heart, lung), using all
         data sets from a given tissue together. Data analysis proceeded in a staged approach.
         The first step was an analysis of variance (ANOVA)-based approach to find gene expression
         differences between behavioral states (sleep or sleep deprived). The data from the
         animals at the baseline group (time zero, lights on) were not used in this first step
         of the analysis. Overall contrasts across conditions were considered by implementing
         gene-specific, fixed-effect ANOVA models [80] using the R/maanova package [81]. Specifically, the model Yi = μ + STATE + ei was used to fit gene expression measures within each tissue, where μ is the mean
         for each array, STATE is the effect for each behavioral state (sleep deprived or sleeping),
         and ei captures random error. The first analysis looked for a main effect of state, comparing
         expression levels between all sleep-deprived (awake) and sleeping (sleep) animals.
         All statistical tests were conducted with a modified F-statistic (Fs) that that shrinks
         variance components based on information from all the probe sets on the array [82]. Critical P values were calculated through permutation analyses incorporating 1,000 sample shuffles
         and pooled F-statistics [83]. False discovery rate (FDR) values were determined using the Benjamini Hochberg method
         [84] implemented through the p. adjust function in R. An FDR threshold of 1% was used
         to determine differential gene expression.
      
      Transcripts differentially expressed between sleep/wake behavioral states (step 1)
         were included in a secondary analysis to test for temporal expression changes among
         the experimental and baseline animals not subjected to gentle handling and enforced
         sleep deprivation. This secondary trend analysis utilized the data obtained from both
         mice sacrificed at lights-on (time zero at 7:00&nbsp;AM) and the animals sacrificed after
         different durations of spontaneous sleep (i.e., at 10:00&nbsp;AM, 1:00&nbsp;PM, 4:00&nbsp;PM, 7:00&nbsp;PM).
         Trend tests were performed through linear regression analyses in which time was treated
         as a continuous variable. For each tissue, expression measures were fit to the model
         Yi(t) = α0(i) + ßj(i)t + ϵijk, which included common intercepts (α0) and unique slopes over time (ßj) for each state (j = 1,2 for sleep and sleep deprivation, respectively). The temporal
         pattern of differential gene expression over time was determined according to the
         slope (positive or negative). Statistical significance was determined as described
         in step 1. Strict sleep enhanced (sleep repressed) genes met criteria for differential
         expression in the first analysis and showed a significantly positive (or negative)
         slope during the spontaneous sleep period (FDR &lt;1%). Unless otherwise noted all other
         plots and data analysis were done in the R programming environment.
      
      Clustering and heatmap generation
      For each gene found to have sleep dependant transcription (either sleep repressed
         or sleep enhanced) in both the heart and lung, we created an eight dimensional vector
         describing the difference in mean mRNA expression between the sleep and sleep deprived
         cohorts as a function of time (mean differences in heart and lung at times 3, 6, 9,
         and12). The agglomerative clustering command (Agglomerate) in Mathematica v. 8.0 (Wolfram
         Research) was used with the Euclidean distance metric to provide a relative ordering
         of the transcript expression vectors. The heat map was generated with the ArrayPlot
         command. Clustering was only done to order the genes for vertical placement on the
         resulting heat map.
      
      DAVID analysis
      We used Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [28,29] bioinformatics toolbox to identify significant overrepresentation in one of the following
         categories: gene ontology (GO) biological process, molecular function, and Protein
         Information Resource (PIR) Key words, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
         pathways. Over-represented functional categories are identified by calculation of
         a conservative adjustment to the one-tailed Fisher’s exact probability that represents
         the upper bound of the distribution. In addition, we used the within-system FDR (False
         discovery rate) to assess the impact of multiple testing using an FDR cutoff of 5%.
      
      To aid in interpreting these results the functional clustering tool available within
         DAVID was used to group overrepresented biological terms that represent overlapping
         gene sets and common physiology. The clustering stringency was set to “medium”. Tables
         were constructed from DAVID clustering output by maintaining the clusters but including
         only the enriched terms that met the FDR threshold.
      
      KEGG pathway visualization
      To generate figures of the imputed pathways, the lists of sleep specific transcripts
         were loaded onto the KEGG Mapper search and color tool [85] (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/tool/map_pathway2.html webcite). The protein processing pathway was redrawn to enhance resolution.
      
      Uniformity of variance analysis
      Only data from animals sacrificed at baseline and after uninterrupted sleep was used
         in this analysis. Log base 2 expression intensities for each probe were grouped based
         on the duration of uninterrupted sleep (baseline-0, 3&nbsp;hrs, 6&nbsp;hrs, 9&nbsp;hrs, and 12&nbsp;hrs).
         Bartlett’s test of homoscedasticity [70] was used to assess the homogeneity of variance among all 5 groups. Testing was done
         in the R programming environment using the bartlett.test() function from library stats. Resulting p values were corrected for multiple testing by the method of Benjamini
         and Hochberg [84] with the p.adjust() command. All probes with a resulting q value &lt;0.01 were retained for further analysis.
         The implementation of the Brown-Forsythe [72] test in R package lawstat was used as a confirmatory nonparametric test. Probes that passed secondary screening
         with a p value &lt;0.01 were considered to have significant changes in variance as a
         function of sleep duration and/or diurnal time.
      
   

