Methods
   
      Plant material
      Picea abies L. Karst embryos and plants were grown as follows. Proliferating embryogenic cultures
         from cell line 28:05 were cultivated on solidified medium supplemented with the plant
         growth regulators (PGRs) auxin and cytokinin. To stimulate differentiation of early
         embryos the cultures were transferred to medium lacking PGRs and for further development
         of the embryos the cultures were transferred to medium supplemented with abscisic
         acid (ABA) [27]. Somatic embryo plants regenerated from cell line 28:05 were grown under accelerated
         growth conditions for seven growth periods in a phytotron [28]. Samples from the plants were collected at the end of the growth period during the
         second week (out of nine) under autumn growth conditions. Seedlings were derived from
         open pollinated seeds from a seed orchard germinated for two weeks in vermiculite
         at 22°C in micro-greenhouses under daylight conditions (approx. 16&nbsp;h light).
      
      Samples from nine different stages or tissues were collected for RNA extraction. Samples
         from embryogenic cultures were annotated as follows: proliferating Proembryogenic
         masses (PEM) in the presence of PGRs; Early embryos (EE) one week after withdrawal
         of PGRs; Late embryos (LE) two weeks after transfer to ABA containing medium; Mature
         cotyledonary embryos (ME) five weeks after transfer to ABA containing medium. The
         following tissues were collected from somatic embryo plants: shoot tips (ST), i.e.
         the topmost 2–3&nbsp;mm of the elongating shoot; cambium (CM) dissected from branches where
         the bark was first removed; young needles, from elongating shoots (YN) and two year
         or older needles (ON). Root tips (RT) were collected from seedlings and the topmost
         2–3&nbsp;mm were sampled. The sampling was performed mid-day and all tissues were frozen
         in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C after collection.
      
      DNA and RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis
      Genomic DNA was isolated from PEMs by DNeasy plant mini kit (Qiagen) or from needles
         from somatic embryo plants using CTAB (adapted from [29]). Total RNA was extracted from the samples described above using spectrum plant total
         RNA kit (Sigma) or RNeasy plant mini kit (Qiagen). DNase I (Sigma) was used to remove
         any genomic contamination. The RNA quality was checked by agarose gel electrophoresis
         and quantified by spectrophotometry. For each sample, 1&nbsp;μg of total RNA was reverse
         transcribed with ReversAid H Minus First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas) using
         1:1 mixed random primer and oligo-dT primer (Fermentas) according to the manufacturer’s
         instructions.
      
      Cloning of P. abies WOX genes
      
      P. abies WOX genes were identified by PCR using degenerate primers described in [30] as well as additional primers targeting the homeodomain in genomic DNA isolated from
         embryogenic cultures (Primer sequences can be found in Additional file 5). PCR-fragments of expected size (approx. 160&nbsp;bp) were cloned using TOPO-kit from
         invitrogen and sequenced.
      
      Additional file 5. Primer sequences used for isolation, cloning and quantitative real-time PCR of P. abies WOX genes.
         	Format: XLSX 
         	Size: 12KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Each unique WOX homeodomain was extended by genome walking (5’ and 3’) using either Thermal Asymmetric
         Interlaced PCR (TAIL-PCR) [31] or Genome Walker Universal Kit (Clontech). Each gene was subsequently cloned using
         gene specific primers and sequenced. The gene structure was determined from the corresponding
         transcripts using gene specific primers or by 5’- and 3’ extension using 5’/3’ RACE
         technology (GeneRacer kit, Invitrogen). All cDNAs were cloned from PEM with the exceptions
         of PaWOX3, which was isolated from shoot tips (ST), and PaWOX5, which was isolated from root tips (RT). Gene predictions were performed with FGENESH
         (http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.phtml webcite) trained with dicot plants (Arabidopsis thaliana). Primer sequences are listed in Additional file 5. Gene and cDNA accessions are listed in Additional file 6.
      
      Phylogenetic analysis
      WOX gene sequences from Ceratopteris. richardii and Cyathea australis were the same as in [22] and Nymphaea jamesoniana, Gnetum gnemon, Ginkgo biloba and Pinus sylvestris were from [2]. Accession numbers for Ostreococcus tauri, Ostreococcus lucimarinus, Physcomitrella patens, Selaginella moellendorffii, Oryza sativa and Vitis vinifera can be found in Additional file 6.
      
      Sequences were aligned using the translation alignment tool and the MAFFT plug-in
         in Geneious (Biomatters Ltd. Auckland, New Zealand) [32] and edited manually. For the large tree only the homeodomain was used, whereas additional
         sequences outside the homeodomain was used for the intermediate clade and modern clade
         sub-trees (alignments can be found in Additional file 4). Parts of the sequences that were difficult to align were excluded from the analyses
         to reduce noise. Furthermore, only genes for which the full-length sequence was known
         was used for the construction of the sub-trees.
      
      Phylogenetic analyses were performed using both Bayesian inference (BI) and maximum
         likelihood (ML). For the BI analysis we used MrBayes (v. 3.1.2) [33]. The results were viewed using the MrBayes plug-in in Geneious. The nucleotide analyses
         were performed using the GTR model with a 4 category discrete gamma-distribution of
         rate variation among sites (GTR + G model). The data set was partitioned into three
         sets corresponding to codon position and rates were allowed to differ across partitions.
         The JTT model with gamma-distribution of rates among sites was chosen for the protein
         analysis with the aid of ProtTest 2.4 [34-36]. For the large tree the analysis was run for 10.000.000 generations with a burn-in
         of 1250. For the intermediate clade and modern clade sub-trees the analysis was run
         for 3.000.000 generations with a burn-in of 600 and 1250 respectively. The results
         from the intermediate clade runs were consistent despite the low burn-in (see Additional
         file 2). The ML analyses were performed using raxmlGUI 1.0 [37,38]. For nucleotide data the GTR gammacat model was used and for protein data we used
         the JTT + gamma model. Support was calculated using the rapid bootstrap method implemented
         in RAxML with 1000 bootstrap replicates. For the large tree the green alga sequence
         OtWOX was used as outgroup, whereas the fern sequence CrWOXA was used as outgroup for the intermediate clade and modern clade sub-trees.
      
      Expression analysis
      The cDNA samples were amplified on an iQ5 Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad).
         The reaction volume was 20&nbsp;μl and Maxima SYBR green qPCR Master mix (Fermentas) was
         used. The three step cycling program was as follows: 95°C for 10&nbsp;min, followed by
         40&nbsp;cycles at 95°C for 15&nbsp;s, 58°C for 30s and 72°C for 30s. The melting curve analysis
         was conducted between 55°C-95°C. Four genes, ELONGATION FACTOR-1 (EFα-1), ACTIN-2 (ACT2), UBIQUITIN and TUBULIN-9 were tested by geNorm (version 3.5, [39]) as candidate reference genes. PCR efficiencies of these reference candidates were
         decided by the linear regression method using the software LinRegPCR [40] and standard curve. No significant difference was found between these two methods.
         EFα-1 and ACT2 had the lowest stability M value. But as the efficiency of the PCR reaction of ACT2 was lower than 1.85, only EFα-1 was chosen as reference gene. PCR efficiencies of the eight target genes were decided
         by the linear regression method. Each target gene was run in nine different tissues
         with three technical replicates and two biological replicates. Wells showing strongly
         deviating PCR efficiencies of either target or reference gene were excluded from further
         analysis. Expression levels were calculated using the ΔΔCt method. Primer sequences
         are listed in Additional file 5. Accessions for reference genes are listed in Additional file 6.
      
      Additional file 6. Accession numbers of WOX gene sequences isolated and used in this study.
         	Format: DOCX 
         	Size: 65KB Download file or  display content in a new window
   

