Methods
   
      The present study is part of a larger prospective longitudinal project called ‘Expectant
         Parents’ on prenatal risk factors and postnatal infant development [45]. More details about recruitment of the participants and the data collection used
         in this study have been reported earlier [45] and are briefly summarized here. At the first routine antenatal visit (between 9–15
         weeks gestational age) 835 women were invited to participate by their midwives, who
         informed them about the project and handed out a leaflet with written information
         about the aim and design of the study. Parents were asked to participate in a longitudinal
         study, in which parents were followed from pregnancy (15 weeks gestational age) until
         24 months postpartum. The aim of the larger prospective study was to gain more insight
         into feelings, emotions, behaviors and expectations about the pregnancy and the fetus,
         and about experiences with and development of the child after birth. The purpose is
         to investigate the quality of parent-infant relationships from parents’ perspectives,
         both in the prenatal and postpartum period. This was also communicated to parents
         [45]. For the purpose of the present study we informed parents that we aimed to gain more
         insight into feelings and emotions with the pregnancy and with the developing fetus.
         Women with a poor understanding of Dutch or English language and those expecting multiple
         births were excluded from participation.
      
      Three-hundred fifty two pregnant women and their partners (n=268, 78%) agreed to participate
         and gave their written consent. The mean age of the women was 31.5 years (SD=4.4),
         ranging from 17 to 44 years. The mean age of the partner was 34.0 years (SD=4.6),
         ranging from 22 to 49 years. The mean gestational age was 26 weeks (SD = 1; Range 23–30 weeks). Most participants were white Caucasian women with the Dutch
         nationality (84%). The other participants have another Western (7%) or non-western
         (9%) ethnic background (e.g., Polish, Moroccan, Turkish, Surinam or Asian). Both women
         and men had completed an average of 16 years of formal education (SD=4.1). Fifty-three
         percent of the women (n= 187) and 53% of the men (n=143) were primiparous. The Medical
         Ethical Committee of the Elisabeth Hospital Tilburg approved the study protocol.
      
      Procedure and measures
      At 26 weeks gestational age parents were asked to fill in questionnaires (M/PAAS)
         and all participating women and their partners completed a pictorial measure during
         a home-visit (PRAM). Women and men who filled in the questionnaires (M/PAAS) after
         31 weeks gestational age were excluded from the analyses to limit the gestational
         age range, since antenatal attachment is known to increase during the course of pregnancy
         with a peak towards the end of the third semester [46,47]. The M/PAAS and PRAM were administered in the same order. We first sent parents the
         M/PAAS at 24–26 weeks GA (by mail) and during the home-visit at 26 weeks GA parents
         completed the PRAM. At the home visit we collected all questionnaires that were filled
         out by the parents before the home-visit and were not send back to us. Our experience
         is that sending parents questionnaires before a home visit -with the instruction that
         we will collect the questionnaires at the home visit- improves the response rate.
         Due to this standard order we are not able to control for a possible effect of the
         M/PAAS on the PRAM.
      
      Maternal antenatal attachment scale (MAAS)
      All women completed the Maternal Antenatal Attachment Scale (MAAS: [4]; Dutch translation by Van Bussel et al., [18]) designed to assess the mother’s attachment with the unborn child. It consists of
         19 items divided over two subscales: “Quality of Attachment (QA)” (11 items) and “Intensity
         of Preoccupation (IP)” (8 items). The subscale QA measures the quality of the mother’s
         affective experience towards the unborn child (such as feelings of closeness and tenderness
         versus feelings of detachment and distance or irritation). The second subscale IP
         assesses the strength of feelings toward the unborn child and the amount of time thinking
         or dreaming about and talking to the fetus. All items are scored on 5-point Likert
         scales. The minimum score for the Global Attachment (i.e., Total) MAAS (GA) score
         is 19 and the maximum score is 95. The scores of the subscale QA range between 11
         and 55 and those of the subscale IP vary between 8 and 40. On both subscales and the
         GA, higher scores reflect a positive quality of attachment and a high preoccupation
         with the unborn child. Internal consistencies of the MAAS and its subscales were adequate
         in earlier research [4] as well as in the current study with Cronbach’s alpha’s of .76 (GA), .66 (QA) and
         .68 (IP).
      
      Paternal antenatal attachment scale (PAAS)
      The fathers completed the Paternal Antenatal Attachment Scale (PAAS: [4]; Dutch translation by Colpin, De Munter, Nys, &amp; Vandemeulebroecke, [48]), which consists of 16 items and also contains the subscales “Quality of Attachment
         (QA)” (10 items) and “Intensity of Preoccupation (IP)” (6 items), which represent
         the same underlying dimensions as the maternal scales, i.e., the quality and the preoccupation
         of antenatal attachment. The 16 items are scored on a 5-point Likert scale. The minimum
         score for the Global Attachment (i.e., Total) PAAS score (GA) is 16 and the maximum
         score is 80. The scores of the subscale QA range between 10 and 50 and the score range
         of the scale IP is between 6 and 30. Higher scores reflect a positive quality of attachment
         and a high preoccupation with the fetus. Internal consistencies of the PAAS and its
         subscales were sufficient in the current study, with Cronbach’s alpha’s of .78 (GA),
         .61 (QA) and .65 (IP).
      
      Pictorial representation of attachment measure (PRAM)
      To assess the representation of antenatal attachment non-verbally, parents completed
         the PRAM [21]. The parent was provided with a white A4-size paper with a big circle in the centre
         (diameter of 18.6 cm), which represents the parent’s current life. A yellow circle
         of 5 cm in the centre of the big circle represents the parent her- or himself. The
         parent was handed a green round sticker (5 cm) and was asked to imagine that the green
         circle represents the unborn child. They were then asked "where would you place the
         baby in your life at the moment?". We also asked all parents to describe why they
         put the sticker at a particular distance. All parents were able to answer this question,
         indicating that there were no problems in understanding the instruction.
      
      For quantative use, the main score is the PRAM Self-Baby-Distance (PRAM-SBD), i.e.,
         the distance, in centimeters, between the centres of the 'Baby' and 'Self' circles.
         The PRAM-SBD could range from 0 to 9.30 cm. A smaller PRAM-SBD is regarded as indicating
         more feelings of attachment.
      
      Statistics
      All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 19.0 for Windows. Since all study
         variables (MAAS/PAAS GA, QA, IP and PRAM-SBD) were normally distributed, parametric
         methods were used. To explore the convergent validity of the PRAM, relationships between
         MAAS, PAAS, and PRAM-SBD, were computed with Pearson product–moment correlations.
         Pearson correlation coefficients and paired sample t-tests were performed to evaluate
         the scores of women and men on attachment measures and PRAM-SBD. In addition, analyses
         were conducted comparing women and men, and primi- and multiparous parents separately,
         and taking into account parental age.
      
   

