Data and methods
   
      The entire experimental process consistes the following steps: (1) obtain and parse
         entire MEDLINE corpus; (2) create disease and drug lexicons; (3) tag MEDLINE sentences
         with drug and disease entities; (4) Find treatment specific patterns; (5) extract
         additional pairs from MEDLINE with selected patterns; and (6) perform semantic analysis
         of extracted drug-disease pairs (Figure 1).
      
      Figure 1. Flow chart of the overall pattern learning, pair extraction and semantic analysis
            process. The entire process consisted of the following steps: (1) obtain entire MEDLINE corpus,
         (2) create a clean and MEDLINE-specific disease lexicon, (3) tag MEDLINE sentences
         with drug and disease entities, (4) extract treatment-specific patterns from tagged
         MEDLINE sentences using known drug-disease pairs, (5) extract new drug-disease pairs
         from tagged MEDLINE using selected patterns, (6) semantic analysis of extracted drug-disease
         pairs.
      
      Obtain MEDLINE data
      We have used 20 million MEDLINE abstracts (roughly 100 million sentences) published
         from 1965 to 2010 as the text corpus for our task of treatment-specific drug-disease
         relationship extraction. The 2010 MEDLINE/PubMed baseline XML files was downloaded
         from NLM’s anonymous FTP server at ftp://ftp.nlm.nih.gov/nlmdata/.medleasebaseline/.
         The MEDLINE XML files were then parsed. Abstracts and titles were extracted and split
         into sentences.
      
      Create drug and disease lexicons
      Clean and MEDLINE-specific disease lexicon: Highly accurate and comprehensive lexicons are prerequisites for many biomedical
         relationship extraction tasks, including our task of extracting drug-disease pairs
         from MEDLINE. In this study, we created a clean and MEDLINE-specific disease lexicon
         by combining an automatic approach and manual curation (Figure 2). The disease lexicon is based on the UMLS (Unified Medical Language System) Metathesaurus
         (2009 AB version) and Human Disease Ontology (HDO). We first created a disease lexicon
         of 528,198 distinct terms by combining UMLS terms with following semantic types: “Disease
         Or Syndrome,” “Neoplastic Process,” “Sign Or Symptom,” “Congenital Abnormality,” “Mental
         or Behavioral Dysfunction,” and “Anatomical Abnormality.” We then added 32,414 distinct
         terms from HDO (http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/1009 webcite). The initial disease lexicon consisted of 529,179 distinct terms. Since our task
         in this study is to extract drug-disease relationship from MEDLINE, we are only interested
         in disease terms that have appeared in MEDLINE at least once. One of our previous
         studies has shown that many UMLS terms have never appeared in MEDLINE [27]. In order to build a MEDLINE-specific disease lexicon as well as to reduce our manual
         curation effort, we tagged all 20 million MEDLINE abstracts with terms from the initial
         disease lexicon. We then filtered out terms with MEDLINE frequency of zero. After
         this MEDLINE filtering, the disease lexicon consisted of 95,762 terms, a 82% reduction
         from original lexicon. We then manually curated the disease lexicon by removing non-disease
         terms (ie, brain, liver etc), ambiguous disease terms (ie consumption, weak etc) and
         terms that were too general (ie disorder, disease, deficiency etc). The final curated
         disease lexicon consisted of 70,247 terms.
      
      Figure 2. The process in creating a clean and MEDLINE specific disease lexicon.
      Drug lexicon: The drug lexicon was downloaded from (http://www.drugbank.ca/ webcite) and consisted of 6,516 drugs, including both FDA-approved drugs and experimental
         drugs. The decision of using drug names from DrugBank instead of RxNORM or other sources
         is that DrugBank contains both experimental and FDA-approved clinical drugs.
      
      Extract known drug-disease pairs from Clinicaltrials.gov
      ClinicalTrials.gov is a registry of federally and privately supported clinical trials
         conducted in the United States and around the world. For each of the trials listed
         at ClinicalTrials.gov, there is associated medical condition and drug treatment information.
         We downloaded a total of 115,026 clinical trial XML files from Clinicaltrials.gov
         (data accessed in 04/2011). A total 196,002 drug-disease pairs were extracted from
         the downloaded XML files. Many of the disease and drug names in the drug-disease pairs
         were in free text form. In addition, drug names are often mixtures of drug brand names
         and trade names. We performed named entity recognition for both drug and disease terms.
         We then mapped drug trade names to their generic names. Drug generic names as well
         as trade names were downloaded from DrugBank. After these steps, total 52,000 drug-disease
         pairs were obtained. These pairs were subsequently used as input (or seeds) to learn
         treatment-specific patterns, which then were used to extract additional drug-disease
         pairs from MEDLINE.
      
      Tag MEDLINE sentences and extract patterns
      We tagged MEDLINE sentences with disease entities from the clean disease lexicon and
         drug entities from the drug list we extracted from DrugBank. The tagging was based
         on case-insensitive extact string matching for high precision an d efficiency. For
         each sentence tagged with both drug and disease entities, we extracted the textual
         patterns between each pair. The pattern could be “DRUG pattern DISEASE” if the drug
         entity precedes the disease entity or “DISEASE pattern DRUG” vice versa. For example,
         from the phrase: “Role of irinotecanin the treatment ofsmall cell carcinoma” (PMID: 11995707), we extracted the pattern “DRUG in the treatment of DISEASE.” From the sentence: “Seventeen women with breast cancerwere treated withtamoxifen (20 mg, twice a day)” (PMID 06798066), the pattern “DISEASE were treated with DRUG” was extracted.
      
      Find treatment-specific patterns
      Drug-disease pairs from ClinicalTrials.gov were first used as input to learn drug-disease
         treatment-specific patterns. Then the learned patterns were used to extract additional
         pairs from MEDLINE. For example, using the pairs from ClinicalTrial.gov, we learned
         a treatment-specific pattern “DRUG in the treatment of DISEASE”. We then used this
         learned pattern to extract additional drug-disease pairs from MEDLINE, which were
         not included in ClinicalTrials.gov. If the pattern “DRUG in the treatment of DISEASE”
         is associated with 1,000 pairs from ClinicalTrials.gov and 10,000 pairs in MEDLINE,
         then we will extract an additional 9,000 pairs from MEDLINE using this pattern.
      
      The patterns between drug entities and disease entities are often highly complicated.
         The patterns can be very general such as “DRUG and DISEASE” or very specific such
         as “DRUG in combination with 5-FU/leucovorin (LV) was subsequently evaluated as first-line
            therapy for DISEASE” as shown in the sentence “Irinotecanin combination with 5-FU/leucovorin (LV) was subsequently evaluated as first-line
            therapy formetastatic colorectal cancer in two randomized, phase III studies” (PMID 11585970). In addition, the patterns
         between a drug entity and a DISEASE entity are often unrelated to drug treatment.
         For instance, the pattern “DRUG-induced DISEASE” in sentence “Tamoxifen-inducedendometrial cancer” (PMID 12701962) is related to drug side effect. In order to find drug treatment
         specific patterns, we extracted the textual patterns between known drug-disease pairs
         from Clinicaltrials.gov. We then ranked the patterns by the number of associated known
         drug-disease pairs. Finally, we manually examined the top patterns and selected drug
         treatment specific ones. After the ranking step, the time required to examine the
         top ranked patterns was minimal (less than 10 minutes).
      
      Extract additional pairs from MEDLINE with selected patterns
      For each of the manually selected treatment-specific patterns, we extracted its associated
         drug-disease pairs from tagged MEDLINE sentences. These patterns were learned using
         known drug-disease pairs. Here, we used them to extract additional drug-disease pairs
         from MEDLINE.
      
      Evaluate extracted drug-disease pairs
      In order to evaluate drug-disease pairs extracted from MEDLINE, which include FDA-approved
         as well as experimental drug-disease pairs, we manually created two MEDLINE-specific
         datasets to evaluate the precision and recall of the extraction algorithm. The first
         evaluation set consisted of drug-disease treatment pairs for the drug “irinotecan”.
         The second set consisted of drug-disease pairs for the disease “thrombocytopenia”.
         To create the “Irinotecan-Disease” evaluation set, we first retrieved all MEDLINE
         sentences (not just sentences containing the patterns) tagged with the term “irinotecan”
         and at least one disease term. We then manually extracted 360 treatment-specific pairs
         from these sentences. For creating the evaluation set “Drug-Thrombocytopenia”, we
         retrieved all MEDLINE sentences tagged with thrombocytopenia and at least one drug
         term. We manually extracted 43 treatment specific pairs from those sentences. The
         annotation task was performed by three curators. Each curator independently annotated
         tagged sentences and created two evaluation sets. Only the pairs agreed upon by all
         three curators were used in the final evaluation. The two sets were created independent
         of the methods we used (evaluators did not know the patterns we used). In this way,
         the final performance captured the effect of both the learned patterns and the quality
         of the drug and disease lexicons. Standard precision, recall, and F1 measures were
         used to evaluate extracted drug-disease pairs. One of the limitations is that these
         two manually created evaluation datasets (one drug and one disease only) may not be
         representative for other diseases and drugs. However, due to the intensive manual
         curation, we did not create evaluation datasets for multiple drugs and multiple diseases.
         Since the aim of this paper is to extract many additional pairs (pairs that are not
         included in ClinicalTrials.gov) from MEDLINE, we could not use pairs from ClincialTrials.gov
         to evaluate these additional pairs extracted from MEDLINE. But we did used pairs from
         ClinicalTrials.gov as prior knowledge (or seeds) to learn treatment-specific patterns.
      
      Semantic analysis of extracted drug-disease pairs
      To demonstrate the potential of the drug-disease pairs that we extracted from MEDLINE
         using the selected patterns in drug repurposing, we studied the correlations of our
         extracted drug-disease pairs with drug target genes as well as drug therapeutic classes.
         We extracted 10,478 drug-target gene pairs from DrugBank (accessed in 01/2012) and
         extracted 5,544 drug-ATC associations from the World Health Organization Anatomical
         Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) Classification System (http://www.whocc.no/atc webcite). Examples of these associations include tamoxifen-anti-estrogens and trometamol-hemofiltrates. For all drug-drug pairs that shared disease indications, we calculated the average
         shared target genes as well as shared ATC codes, then compared them to those of all
         drug-drug pairs.
      
   

