Methods
   
      This study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee at Deakin University.
      Research participants
      Male and female patients who completed treatment for MM were interviewed for this
         study. Inclusion criteria were people living in Victoria Australia, aged 18&nbsp;years
         and over; a diagnosis of symptomatic MM who had completed therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
         induction therapy and/or transplant) 2-12 months prior; and with the ability to speak
         English and complete English-language versions of the patient-completed measures.
      
      Procedure
      A purposive sampling technique was used to select patients who were living in Victoria,
         Australia. The patient database maintained by the Leukaemia Foundation of Australia
         was used to identify potential participants. The database was screened for patient
         names, cancer diagnosis, age and address details as well as approximate date(s) of
         treatment for MM. Potential participants were sent a cover letter and Participant
         Information and Consent Form, which provided an overview of the study, eligibility
         criteria, and an explanation of what participation in the study would involve. If
         patients deemed themselves eligible and wished to participate, they were asked to
         complete the consent form and return it. Once received, the interviewer rang the patient
         to confirm that they met the eligibility criteria and an interview time was arranged.
      
      A self-administered questionnaire was mailed to participants prior to the telephone
         interview. Participants were asked to complete the questionnaire before completing
         the interview and could use it as a reference point during the interview. On completion
         of the interview, participants were asked to return the questionnaire using a reply
         paid envelope.
      
      Telephone interviews were conducted from December 2011-February 2012. The interviews
         were conducted by a nurse counsellor with knowledge of MM and extensive experience
         in conducting interviews with cancer patients. Interviews were conducted by telephone
         and were recorded (with the permission of participants). Interviews continued until
         saturation was reached. A summary of the research findings was sent to the participants
         once the study was completed.
      
      Measures
      The questionnaire completed prior to the interview measured patient and clinical characteristics,
         including date of birth, highest level of education, postcode, living arrangements,
         treatment type and length of time since treatment. Current and pre diagnosis physical
         activity was measured using an adapted version of the Leisure Time Exercise Questionnaire
         developed by Godin et al. [24,25]. Participants recorded their average weekly physical activity prior to diagnosis
         (pre diagnosis physical activity) and their average weekly physical activity in the
         past month (current physical activity). The Leisure Time Exercise Questionnaire assesses
         average frequency and duration of light (e.g., easy walking), moderate (e.g., brisk
         walking) and strenuous (e.g., running) physical activity. It has been used in studies
         of cancer survivors [26,27] and patients with MM [18].
      
      A grounded theory approach was taken in this study [28]. Interviews were semi-structured and follow up questions and probes facilitated a
         deeper understanding of the participants’ perceptions and experiences of physical
         activity. The interview prompts focused on participation in physical activity before,
         during and after treatment and any perceived barriers and benefits of participation.
         The interview was guided by a series of pre-determined prompts, with flexibility in
         the order in which they were covered to allow the interview to flow. Prompts included:
         “Can you describe your participation in exercise before during and after treatment?”;
         “What things stop or limit your participation in exercise?”; and “What things motivate
         you to exercise?”
      
      One interviewer conducted all of the interviews. Author one briefed the interviewer
         about the aims and purpose of the interviews and listened to and gave feedback on
         interviewing style. Regular meetings were held between author one and the interviewer
         to discuss important themes, the point at which saturation was reached and any logistical
         issues.
      
      Data analysis
      Descriptive statistics were used to analyse the questionnaire data, including the
         demographic and clinical characteristics and participation in physical activity.
      
      In terms of qualitative data, the interviews were transcribed verbatim and the accuracy
         of the transcripts was verified, with 80% checked by the researchers against the interview
         recordings. Data from the interviews were analysed using the nVivo software package.
         Pseudonyms were assigned to participants so that they could not be identified.
      
      The analysis process was inductive and coding was used to reduce the data into meaningful
         themes [29]. The coding procedures applied the “constant comparison” method [30]. The constant comparison method utilises three stages of coding. For the initial
         stage, a relevant code was applied to ideas in the transcripts to develop categories
         which captured the meaning of the idea [31]. Under the supervision of authors one and five, a research assistant coded the data.
         As a way of validating the codes, three interviews were independently coded by author
         one to check the interpretations of the coder and validate the themes. There was agreement
         between both researchers as to the dominant themes and their interpretation of the
         meaning from the ideas represented in the interviews.
      
      The second stage of coding involved reducing codes through grouping similar codes
         into broader, more encompassing themes and comparing them to one another and cross
         checking back to the original interview text. In the final stage, categories were
         delimited to gain parsimony and focus on the aims of the study [31]. At this stage, comparisons were made based on gender and type of therapy (ASCT or
         other therapies, including chemotherapy, radiotherapy). Examination of different therapy
         groups was important as treatment with or without ASCT may influence the functional
         status of the patient, which may have an impact on their physical activity. During
         the coding processes, the authors and interviewer met to discuss the themes that were
         emerging from the interviews.
      
      In the Results section, the gender, age and main treatment type of participants are
         included in parentheses following direct quotes. Only the main treatment type has
         been included here; participants may also have been treated with a range of induction
         and supportive therapies including thalidomide and steroids (e.g., prednisolone and
         zometa).
      
   

