Methods
   
      Animals
      All experiment protocols were approved by the Animal Ethics Board of Maastricht University
         according to Dutch governmental regulations.
      
      Adult Sprague–Dawley rats (body weight 250-320&nbsp;g), obtained from Charles River (France),
         were kept under standard laboratory conditions with food and water given ad libitum,
         21 ± 2°C environment temperature, a 12&nbsp;h light/dark schedule (lights on at 07:00&nbsp;h)
         and background noise provided by radio. Breeding was carried out in our own animal
         facility to prevent stress resulting from transportation during pregnancy. To facilitate
         mating a female was housed together with a male for 1 night in a breeding cage. The
         duration of gestation was determined by the observation of a mucus plug. Exclusively
         male offspring were used in this study, because both morphological and behavioral
         evidence show a differential vulnerability to a birth insult in males versus females.
         A greater impact is seen in the male gender, possibly due to the difference in circulating
         sex hormones compared to females [38].
      
      Animal model
      Dams were anesthetized by isoflurane (4% induction and 1.5% maintenance) on E17 and
         subjected to a midline laparotomy. Next, FA preconditioning was induced by completely
         clamping both uterine and both ovarian arteries with removable clamps for 30&nbsp;minutes.
         Thereafter, dams were sutured up to recover in their home-cage. These procedures were
         performed inside a closed incubator to maintain normothermia and 75% air humidity.
         Wild-type dams were used as control mothers.
      
      Tissue preparation
      FA and control pups were delivered on E21 by Caesarean section and immediately decapitated.
         Control animals have not undergone any intervention prior to birth (see Figure&nbsp;4). To prevent litter effects only one pup per dam was used for micro-array analysis,
         with a total of five males per condition. After removing the cerebellum left hemispheres
         were dissected and submerged in RNA stabilizing reagent (Qiagen, Benelux BV, Venlo,
         The Netherlands). Samples were kept at 4°C for four days, before being snap frozen
         in liquid nitrogen, and ultimately stored at −80°C. For RT-qPCR analysis a maximum
         of two pups per litter were used, with a total of five pups per condition. Right hemispheres
         were dissected, then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and ultimately stored at −80°C.
         Additionally, in six males per condition we dissected three different brain regions:
         prefrontal cortex (PFC), caudate-putamen (CPU), and hippocampus for analysis of regional
         expression by RT-qPCR. Dissection of these brain regions was performed in situ under
         4x magnification immediately after sacrificing the pups.
      
      Figure 4. Experimental design. Two experimental groups were used: Control (C) and Fetal Asphyctic (FA) preconditioning.
         On embryonic day 17 (E17) FA animals were subjected to a 30-minute preconditioning
         stimulus by clamping the uterine circulation, and 96&nbsp;hours later both experimental
         groups were sacrificed. Control animals are wild-type.
      
      RNA-isolation
      For micro-array analysis total RNA extraction and purification were performed on mini
         RNeasy columns (Qiagen Benelux BV, Venlo, The Netherlands), according to the manufacturer’s
         instructions. Quantity and purity of total RNA was determined by spectrophotometer
         analysis using the Nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA).
         Only samples with a 260/280 ratio between 1.8 and 2.1, and a 260/230 ratio between
         1.5 and 2.0 were selected for micro-array analysis. Additionally, RNA quality measurements
         were performed with Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies Netherlands B.V.). Samples
         with an RNA integrity number (RIN) below 8 were excluded.
      
      For RT-qPCR total RNA was extracted with Trizol® reagent (Invitrogen, Paisley Scotland,
         UK) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Next, cDNA was generated with RevertAid
         First Strand cDNA synthesis kit (Fermentas GMBH, St. Leon-Rot, Germany).
      
      RT-qPCR
      RT-qPCR reactions were carried out using SYBR green PCR master mix and the LightCycler
         480 (Roche Diagnostics, Almere, The Netherlands). To evaluate relative expression
         we used Gapdh, Hprt, and ß-actin as internal controls. Sequences of primers used can be found in Table&nbsp;1.
      
      Table 1. Primer design for RT-qPCR
      Micro-array analysis
      Using the Ambion WT Expression Kit, per sample, an amount of 100&nbsp;ng of total RNA spiked
         with bacterial poly-A RNA positive controls (Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, USA) was
         converted to double stranded cDNA in a reverse transcription reaction. Next the sample
         was converted and amplified to antisense cRNA in an in vitro transcription reaction which was subsequently converted to single stranded sense
         cDNA. Finally, samples were fragmented and labeled with biotin in a terminal labeling
         reaction according to the Affymetrix WT Terminal Labeling Kit. A mixture of fragmented
         biotinylated cDNA and hybridization controls (Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, USA) was
         hybridized on Affymetrix GeneChip Rat Gene 1.0 ST Arrays followed by staining and
         washing in a GeneChip® fluidics station 450 (Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, USA) according
         to the manufacturer’s procedures. To assess the raw probe signal intensities, chips
         were scanned using a GeneChip® scanner 3000 (Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, USA). According
         to MIAME requirements data were submitted the NCBI GEO database, and are available
         under accession number: GSE42676.
      
      Gene Set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
      For GSEA, a total of 737 rattus norvegicus gene sets were assembled, including 196
         KEGG pathways (release 59.0), 81 Biocarta pathways (accessed August 18th 2011), 184 Gene Ontology terms (AmiGO version 1.8), and 276 Pfam protein families
         database (Pfam 25.0). Each gene-set contained a minimum of 15 genes and a maximum
         of 500 genes in accordance with GSEA recommendations. The analysis was conducted using
         the GSEA software v2.07, provided by the Broad Institute (Cambridge, MA, USA) [13].
      
      Statistics
      For RT-qPCR all data were distributed normally as tested with Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.
         Statistical significance was tested with the unpaired, two-tailed Student’s t-test.
         Results are presented as means + SEM, normalized to control and p-values &lt;0.05 were
         considered statistically significant.
      
      Analysis of the micro-array data was performed in the R programming environment (version
         2.12.0), with the packages developed within the Bioconductor project [39]. The analysis was based on the RMA expression levels of the probe sets. Differential
         expression was assessed with the Limma package using moderated t-statistics [40]. Results are presented as fold changes and p-values &lt; 0.01 were considered statistically
         significant.
      
      For GSEA the micro-array dataset was pre-ranked using moderated t-statistics [40]. A gene set enrichment score (ES) was calculated based on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
         statistic and for each gene set the ES was normalized to account for difference in
         gene set size. Finally, a false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated relative to the
         normalized enrichment score (NES) values to determine the probability of type I errors.
         To control for multiple testing we used the false discovery rate (FDR) as described
         by Benjamin and Hochberg [41]. Enriched gene-sets with an FDR q-value &lt;0.05 were selected. Ultimately we performed
         a ‘Leading Edge Analysis’ in GSEA on significantly enriched gene-sets, to identify
         the genes that contribute most to the enrichment signal.
      
   

