Methods
   
      Study population
      Sixty patients with IPF and 150 healthy volunteers solicited from among the hospital
         personnel as control subjects were included in this study, which was performed between
         January 2009 and May 2011 at King Khalid University Hospital, King Saud University,
         Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board/Ethics
         Committee of the College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
         Written informed consent was obtained from each individual included in the study.
         IPF was diagnosed according to the American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory
         Society consensus classification [12]. Histopathological evidence of IPF was available for 24 (40%) of patients, while
         the remaining patients were diagnosed on the basis of compatible clinical, laboratory
         and HRCT findings. Healthy controls were randomly selected and had no associated medical
         illness. All subjects were evaluated as outpatients, and none had clinical evidence
         of concurrent infection. None of the patients was receiving any corticosteroids or
         other immunosuppressive medications at the time of blood sample collection. In addition,
         none of the patients had any history of acute exacerbations of IPF within three months
         of the serum cytokine measurements.
      
      Thirty patients seen during the study period were excluded because although their
         HRCT images were consistent with usual interstitial pneumonia, they had positive autoantibodies
         based on serological tests. These exclusion criteria included antinuclear antibody
         titer &gt; 320, rheumatoid factor titer &gt; 60, and/or the presence of anti-cyclic citrullinated
         peptide, anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, anti-double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), anti-Smith, anti-Sclero
         70 (Scl-70), anti- ribonucleoprotein (RNP), and anti-histidyl-tRNA synthetase (Jo-1).
      
      Measurements
      Pulmonary function tests (PFT Masterscreen; Jaeger, Hoechberg, Germany) were performed
         using standard methodologies, including spirometry, plethysmography, and measurement
         of the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLco) [13-15]. Arterial blood gas values (Rapid Lab 865; Bayer, Plymouth, UK) were obtained for
         the partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2), the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2), and the extent of oxygen saturation (SaO2).
      
      Chest HRCT
      All patients underwent CT scanning (Light Speed 16 or VCT XT; GE Medical Systems,
         Milwaukee, WI, USA). Full-volume scans reconstructed every 2.5&nbsp;mm were obtained throughout
         the entire thorax. Scans were performed during suspended inspiration with patients
         in the supine position. Additional limited scans using 1.25-mm thin collimation at
         10-mm intervals from the aortic arch level to the lung bases, with high spatial resolution
         reconstruction, were obtained at end-expiration with patients in the prone position.
         CT images were assessed for the presence and extent of parenchymal abnormalities,
         including ground-glass opacity, reticular opacity, honeycombing, traction bronchiectasis,
         emphysema, and architectural distortion. The extent of parenchymal abnormality was
         determined for each complete lung using a previously described 5-point scale [16] (0 = no involvement; 1 = 1-25%; 2 = 26-50%; 3 = 51-75%; and 4 = 76-100%). Each lung
         was scored separately and divided into three zones (upper zone, lung apex to aortic
         arch; middle zone, aortic arch to a position inferior to the pulmonary veins; and
         lower zone, from the inferior pulmonary veins to the diaphragm). A mean score for
         each of the six zones was calculated for each parenchymal pattern (i.e., ground-glass
         opacity, reticular opacity, honeycombing, traction bronchiectasis, emphysema, and
         architectural distortion). Total lung involvement was determined by summing the scores
         for each CT pattern (total extent).
      
      DNA extraction from peripheral blood
      Peripheral blood (8&nbsp;ml) was drawn and centrifuged with an acid-citrate-dextrose (ACD)
         anti-coagulant. DNA extraction was performed using a QIAamp DNA mini kit (Qiagen Inc.,
         Valencia, CA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, cells
         were lysed with lysis buffer and proteases, the DNA was ethanol precipitated, and
         the sample was transferred to a QIAamp column and washed twice with washing buffer
         and centrifugation. To increase the DNA yield, 200&nbsp;μl of elution buffer was added
         to the column and the sample was incubated for 5&nbsp;minutes at room temperature. Finally,
         the DNA was collected by centrifugation for 1&nbsp;minute. The concentration and purity
         of the recovered DNA were assessed by spectrophotometry (GeneQuantII, Pharmacia Biotech,
         Sweden), and the sample was stored in elution buffer at −20°C until use.
      
      Cytokine genotyping
      The investigated gene polymorphisms included TGF-β1 (codons 10 and 25), IL-6 (−174), IL-10 (−1082, -819 and −592), TNF-α (−308), and
         IFN-γ (+874). Cytokine genotyping was performed using the polymerase chain reaction
         sequence specific primer (PCR-SSP) method with a cytokine-genotyping tray (Micro SSP™
         primer set tray; One Lambda Inc., Canoga Park, CA, USA). DNA samples were thawed at
         room temperature and mixed with D-mix and recombinant Taq polymerase. The mixture
         was dispensed to the tray and amplification was performed in a thermocycler (Perkin
         Elmer 9700; Perkin Elmer, Foster City, CA, USA) using the following program: denaturation
         at 96°C for 2&nbsp;minutes, 9&nbsp;cycles of 96°C for 10&nbsp;seconds and 63°C for 50&nbsp;seconds, and
         then 20&nbsp;cycles of 96°C for 10&nbsp;seconds, 59°C for 50&nbsp;seconds and 72°C for 30&nbsp;seconds.
         The amplified DNA products were resolved by electrophoresis and identified using a
         gel-documentation system (Alpha Inotech, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
      
      Serum cytokine assay
      Due to resource limitations, blood samples were collected from the first consecutively
         enrolled IPF patients (n = 38) and healthy controls (n = 36). Cytokines were assessed
         in serum samples by quantitative sandwich immunoassays performed on a fully automated
         ELISA machine (ETI-Max 3000; DiasORIN S.p.A, Vercelli, Italy) using ELISA kits purchased
         from R&amp;D Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA). Estimation of each cytokine was performed
         in accordance with the manufacturers’ instructions. Briefly, 50&nbsp;μl of assay diluent
         was dispensed to each well, and 200&nbsp;μl of standard, control or serum sample were added
         as appropriate. The contents were incubated at room temperature for 2&nbsp;hours, washed
         four times with washing buffer, and mixed with 200&nbsp;μl of cytokine conjugate per well.
         After a further incubation for 2&nbsp;hours at room temperature, the plate was washed and
         200&nbsp;μl of substrate was dispensed to each well. The plate was then incubated for 20&nbsp;minutes
         at room temperature, and 50&nbsp;μl of stop solution was added to each well. Optical densities
         were recorded and the results were expressed in pg/ml.
      
      Statistical analysis
      Data are presented as proportions, means and standard deviations for normally distributed
         data, or as median (range) for non-normally distributed data. Allele and genotype
         frequencies were calculated by direct counting. Observed and expected frequencies
         were compared using the chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test to check for Hardy-Weinberg
         equilibrium (HWE). Differences between genotype and allele frequencies in IPF patients
         and controls were analyzed with the chi-square or Fisher’s exact tests. Odds ratios
         and 95% confidence intervals for relative risks were calculated. One-way analysis
         of variance (ANOVA) and the Student’s t-test were used to compare the means of quantitative variables (age, physiological
         parameters and HRCT scores) in relation to various genotypes and serum cytokines level.
         For nonparametric data (serum cytokine levels between patients and controls), the
         Mann–Whitney U test was used. Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation coefficients were
         used for parametric and nonparametric data, respectively, to examine the relationship
         between serum cytokine levels and quantitative variables. A two-sided p value &lt; 0.05
         was considered statistically significant. All analyses were performed using the Statistical
         Software Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS, version 16.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago,
         IL, USA).
      
   

