Methods
   
      Patient selection
      Serum samples were collected from 87 healthy subjects, 73 bone and soft tissue sarcoma
         patients, and 7 metastatic cancer patients with musculoskeletal metastases. The details
         of the clinicopathological features of 73 patients of the bone and soft tissue sarcoma
         are listed in Table&nbsp;1. The mean follow-up period was 43&nbsp;months (range, 1–115&nbsp;months). The patient group
         included 36 males and 37 females, with a mean age of 51&nbsp;years (range, 10–85&nbsp;years)
         at the first presentation. There were 23 bone sarcomas, including 14 osteosarcomas
         (OS), 3 chondrosarcomas, 3 Ewing sarcomas, and 3 chordomas. There were also 50 soft
         tissue sarcomas, including 10 malignant fibrous histiocytomas (MFH), 9 liposarcomas
         (5 myxoid liposarcomas, 2 pleomorphic liposarcomas, and 2 dedifferentiated liposarcomas),
         6 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST), 3 synovial sarcomas, 3 dermatofibrosarcoma
         protuberans, 3 rhabdomyosarcomas, 2 epithelioid sarcomas, 2 clear cell sarcomas, an
         extraskeletal chondrosarcoma, an extraskeletal osteosarcoma, a myxofibrosarcoma, a
         malignant granular cell tumor, and 8 unclassifiable spindle cell sarcomas. There were
         six metastatic cancer to the bone (2 thyroid cancers, 2 renal cancers, 1 lung cancer,
         and 1 multiple myeloma), and one metastatic cancer to the soft tissue (squamous cell
         carcinoma). A histological grading of the bone sarcoma was performed according to
         the grading system proposed by Borders AC [15] and a histological evaluation of soft tissue sarcoma was performed using the grading
         system of the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group system [16]. The histological grading in soft tissue sarcoma was low grade (grade 1) in 9 sarcomas
         and in high grade 41 sarcomas (grade 2:20, grade 3:21), while the histological grading
         in bone sarcoma was low grade in 4 sarcomas and high grade in 19 sarcomas. All patients
         underwent a complete tumor resection with a wide margin during the initial surgery
         at our hospital. The diagnoses were primarily based on the morphological appearance
         based on the results of their reactivity for immunostaining. The 73 samples consisted
         of 50 primary lesions, 17 local recurrences, and 6 metastases.
      
      Table 1. Patient and tumor characteristics
      At the final follow-up, 26 patients were continuously disease-free, 13 patients had
         no evidence of disease, 15 patients were alive with disease, and 19 patients died
         of disease.
      
      The control subjects comprised 28 males and 59 females. The mean age of the control
         subjects was 46&nbsp;years (range, 19–89&nbsp;years). Almost all control subjects younger than
         60&nbsp;years old were healthy volunteers without any medical history of cancer. Those
         over 60&nbsp;years of age had conditions such as osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, and so on,
         and all had C-reactive protein values below 0.5&nbsp;mg/dl.
      
      This study is in compliance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and
         written informed consent was obtained from all of the patients included in this study.
      
      Serum sample collection and storage
      Fifty-one serum samples were obtained at open biopsy or initial surgical excision
         before administration of any chemotherapeutic agent. Seventeen serum samples were
         obtained at the excision of recurrent tumor. Five serum samples were obtained at the
         excision of the metastatic lesion. Longitudinal change of the sN-CAD was measured
         by measuring the serum level at the pre- and post-operative day in a metastatic epitheliod
         sarcoma patient. Venous blood samples were collected and centrifuged at 2,500&nbsp;g for
         10&nbsp;min. All sera were stored at -80°C until measurement. All samples were collected
         under the approval of the ethics committee of the Mie University Graduate School of
         Medicine.
      
      Immunoenzymometric assay for the sN-CAD levels
      The immunoenzymometric assay for the sN-CAD levels was performed using a home-made
         ELISA plate, as described in a previous report [17]. All serum samples were diluted 5 times in PBS containing 0.1% bovine serum albumin
         (BSA). A dilution series of recombinant N-cadherin from 1 to 1,000&nbsp;ng/ml was prepared
         (recombinant human N-cadherin/Fc chimera, R&amp;D Systems, Abingdon, UK). A 96 well immunoplate
         (CN-469949, Nalge Nunc International, Denmark) was coated with 75 μl of the diluted
         sample overnight at 4°C. The wells were washed with PBS/0.05% Tween-20 and quenched
         at 37°C with PBS/1% BSA for 1&nbsp;hr. Next, the plates were washed again (4 times) and
         incubated with the primary antibody (Mouse GC-4 antibody, Sigma, St. Louis, MO; 1/200
         in PBS/0.1% BSA) at 37°C for 2&nbsp;hr. The plates were then washed again (4 times), and
         subsequently incubated with a mouse secondary antibody linked to alkaline phosphatase
         (Goat anti-mouse linked to alkaline phosphatase, Sigma, St. Louis, MO; 1/3,000). The
         substrate, p-nitrophenylphosphate (N2765, Sigma, St. Louis, MO), was added to the
         plates, and after 30&nbsp;min, the optical density of each well was determined with a microplate
         reader (Molecular Devices, Wokingham, UK) at 405&nbsp;nm. Measurements were done at least
         in a triplet for each sample, and the mean value was calculated.
      
      Statistical analysis
      The Mann–Whitney U test was used to analyze the association of the serum sN-CAD levels
         between healthy subjects and patients. The Mann–Whitney U test was also used to analyze
         the associations between the serum sN-CAD levels and the clinicopathological variables,
         such as the type of tumor (bone or soft tissue sarcoma), age, tumor depth, tumor size,
         histological grade, and the type of malignancy (primary or recurrence/metastasis).
         We defined the cut-off level of sN-CAD at 1,500&nbsp;ng/ml to identify the high-risk patient
         group. The disease-free survival (DFS) was defined as the time from the initial treatment
         to the date of clinically documented local recurrence/metastasis. The local recurrence-free
         survival (LRFS) was defined as the time from the initial treatment to the date of
         clinically documented local recurrence. The metastasis-free survival (MFS) was defined
         as the time from the initial treatment to the date of clinically documented distant
         metastasis. The overall survival (OS) was defined as the time from the initial treatment
         to the date of death from any cause. For the multivariate analysis, a Cox proportional
         hazards regression model was used to identify the statistically significant differences
         in the survival and to estimate hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals. The prognostic
         variables by the univariate analysis with a p &lt; 0.2 (age, tumor size, histological
         grading, and sN-CAD) were entered into a Cox multivariate analysis model. A p value &lt; 0.05
         was considered to be significant. The analysis was performed using the StatView statistical
         software package (version 5.0; SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). The statistical analysis
         was performed by N.R. and M.A., and both of whom have responsibility for the results
         of statistical analysis.
      
   

