Methods
   
      Patients
      For this study 210 consecutive patients diagnosed with invasive breast cancer were
         enrolled, according to the ethics committee of the University Hospital Freiburg, Germany
         (EK-Freiburg 324/09). Standard archival paraffin blocks of primary breast cancer were
         retrieved from the archives of the Department of Pathology of the University Hospital
         Freiburg. All patients underwent surgery in the Breast Unit of the Department of Gynecology
         of the University Hospital Freiburg. Primary treatment consisted of radical mastectomy,
         modified radical mastectomy, or breast-conserving surgery including sentinel and/or
         axillary lymph node dissection between the years 1991 and 2001. Patients who received
         neoadjuvant chemotherapy, or who underwent preceding treatment at another institution
         or patients with a second primary tumor were excluded. Median age at the time of diagnosis
         was 57&nbsp;years. Histopathological analyses demonstrated invasive ductal cancer in 73.8%
         of cases and invasive lobular subtype in 7.6%. The remaining 18.6% were diagnosed
         as ductal/lobular, mucinous (colloid), tubular, medullary and papillary carcinomas,
         respectively. In 88/210 (41.9%) patients lymph node involvement was histologically
         confirmed at the time of surgery. 146/210 (69.5%) of the tumors were estrogen or progesterone
         receptor positive. Immunohistochemical Her2/neu overexpression was recorded in 40
         (21.2%) of the cases.
      
      Follow up ranged from 1 to 107&nbsp;months (mean 62, median 68&nbsp;months), recurrences occurred
         in 59 (28.1%) and deaths in 43 (20.5%) of women, respectively. The 63 cases with technical
         failure in microarray mapping were excluded from the study.
      
      Materials
      Paraffin-embedded tissue blocks were used to generate tissue-microarrays (TMAs). At
         least three representative cores of each tumor were selected. Two specimens of normal
         breast as well as non neoplastic breast tissue adjacent to the lesions were used as
         controls. Four micron paraffin sections were stained immunohistochemically as previously
         described [16]. The following monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were used: mAb 6C1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
         Inc., Santa Cruz, USA) to several members of the MAGE-A family, mAb MA454 to MAGE-A1,
         mAb M3H67 also to several members of the MAGE-A family and mAb 57B to MAGE-A4 [19-21]. Next to these, the immunoreactivity of mAb E978 to NY-ESO-1 [22] and mAb #26 (BD Biosciences Clontech, Palo Alto, USA) to GAGE was assessed. For the
         detection of NY-BR-1, mAb NY-BR-1#5 previously generated by our group was utilized
         [23].
      
      Evaluation of the immunohistochemical staining was performed in a blinded set up regarding
         the clinical data. Scoring of the expression was performed semiquantitatively as described
         previously [24]. In brief, both percentage of stained cells and staining intensity were evaluated.
         No staining or weak staining in &lt;5% of cells was defined as 0, weak staining in at
         least 5% as 1, moderate staining in up to 50% as 2 and moderate staining in &gt;50% of
         cells and strong staining of any percentage of the cells as 3. The results were subsequently
         dichotomized for statistical analysis and the defined cut-off point for positivity
         for the statistical analysis was set to 2.
      
      Our data were analysed using the statistical package SPSS for windows version 17.0
         (SPSS, Chicago, Illinois, USA). The relationship among clinico-pathological parameters
         and CTA expression were tested using the chi-square and Fisher’s exact test. Survival
         outcomes were analysed with Kaplan-Meier survival functions and compared between groups
         with the log-rank statistics. To determine the association of clinico-pathological
         parameters with survival, univariate and multivariate Cox regression models were used.
         The multivariate Cox regression model was adjusted for any known prognostic variables
         with p&lt;0.05. For all tests p&lt;0.05 was accepted as threshold of statistical significance.
         Cases with missing microarrays for some of the antigens were handled in the statistical
         analysis as missing data.
      
   

