Methods
   
      Existing systematic reviews and rationale for the current review
      In order to develop an efficient search and review strategy, over 200 existing reviews
         on the same or similar topics were firstly systematically examined (identified in
         a broad search covering PROs and quality of life measures between January 2000 and
         October 2011). Three reviews [26-28] were identified as the baseline reviews for this project and their review strategies
         were carefully examined in aspects such as the aim and scope, time span, search strategy
         and search terms used, articles included in each review, and conclusions drawn. A
         table summarising the three systematic reviews is presented in Table&nbsp;1.
      
      Table 1. A comparison of three baseline reviews
      Review search strategy
      Analysing the results of above three systematic reviews demonstrates the importance
         of search strategies in determining what literature will be included in the study,
         which in turn, may influence what conclusions will be derived. Valderas et al.’s (2008)
         [27] review excluded three out of the five clinical trials on cancer patients that were
         included in Marshall et al.’s (2006) [28] review. Lucket et al.’s (2009) review [26] excluded one article (Taenzer et al. (2000), [33] a before-after study) from Marshall et al.’s review [27]. A mixed methodology search was developed in order to maximise the identification
         of recent literature in a short period of time. The search was conducted in six different
         ways as follows:
      
      1. A text-based search strategy was developed based on previous reviews. To elicit
         previous reviews, a search was conducted for the text terms ‘patient reported outcome*’,
         ‘self-reported’, ‘self-assessed’ anywhere in title, abstract and key words, combined
         with ‘quality of life’, ‘symptom’, ‘functional status’, ‘health status’, ‘patient
         satisfaction’, ‘unmet need*’ anywhere in title, abstract and key words. For original
         articles, a search was conducted using the same strategy as above but restricted to
         those with ‘neoplasm’ or ‘cancer’ in the key words. The search results were restricted
         to between January 2000 and October 2011 (full search strategy is listed in Additional
         file 1: Appendix 1).
      
      Additional file 1. Appendix 1. Full text search strategies used in Scopus.
         	Format: DOC 
         	Size: 23KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Word Viewer
      2. All reviews were evaluated (over 200 in total on various topics but not limited
         to only cancer patients) with three baseline reviews used as the starting point for
         our top-down and bottom-up search strategy. We chose the three baseline reviews because
         that: 1) they are all systematic reviews that could be helpful in forming the structure
         or strategy of the current review (but not necessarily restricted to cancer patients);
         and 2) they were published after 2005.
      
      3. All articles were examined if they cited the 7 key randomised controlled trials
         [33-39] listed in the above reviews (bottom-up approach). References were also sought from
         the most recently published trials, editorials, and commentaries (a top-down approach).
         The powerful citation tracking feature of Scopus™ made this strategy feasible.
      
      4. Simplified text terms (i.e. patient reported outcome, PRO, PROM, Quality of life,
         QOL) were used to conduct a web search for identifying grey literature.
      
      5. Leading researchers and experts in the field (elicited through the advice of Cancer
         Institute NSW (CINSW), editorials, review articles and most cited articles) were purposefully
         searched in order to analyse the references and citations in their publications.
      
      6. Some key cancer centres’ websites were also searched in order to get more detailed
         information.
      
      The search was limited to the Scopus™ database as it is the largest abstract and citation
         database of peer-reviewed literature and quality web sources including 100% coverage
         of Medline titles and EBASE. It also tracks, analyses and visualises publication results,
         which is well suited to our top-down and bottom-up search strategy.
      
      Aim, study selection and endpoints of the review
      In this review, the aim was to synthesize the evidence in relation to the impact of
         routinely collected PROs on patients, providers, and health organisations. The frameworks
         proposed by Greenhalgh and colleagues [25] and by Abernethy and colleagues [40] were adopted to guide our evaluation of the existing literature. Greenhalgh et al.
         [25] proposed a framework (Figure&nbsp;1) that depicts mechanisms between the routine collection of PROs and changes in patient
         outcomes. The authors suggest that the multilayer mediators (i.e. changes to doctor-patient
         communication, monitoring treatment responses, detecting unrecognised problems, changes
         to patient health behaviour, changes to clinicians’ management plans, and improved
         patient satisfaction) have complex relationships among them. The studies that revealed
         these complex relationships may assist in understanding whether and how the underlying
         mechanisms of routinely collected PROs work to improve the intended outcomes.
      
      Figure 1. A hypothetical framework to understand the impact of routinely collected PROs on patient
            health outcomes (adopted from Greenhalgh et al. (2005) [25]with permission).
      Recently, Abernethy and colleagues [40] have argued that the routine collection of PROs has the capacity to impact not only
         at the patient-level, but by addressing the logistics of data linkage, and could ensure
         that the system will grow to accommodate other clinical- and health system-level issues;
         for example, evaluating comparative effectiveness of treatments, monitoring quality
         of care, and translating basic science findings into clinical practice (Figure&nbsp;2). The integration of data systems will fuel rapid learning cancer care at the national
         and societal levels (see Figure&nbsp;2a and b), making many types of research and system learning possible across institutions
         and health sectors. The benefits and implications of such a rapid learning health
         care system may include, but is not limited to, strong and effective quality improvement
         (QI), increased transparency, accountability, public reporting, better health system
         performance (monitoring, planning, financing, evaluating, responding) and better quality
         of care.
      
      Figure 2. (a) A data linkage framework (b): A learning health care system. Note: Figures&nbsp;2: adopted from Aberthnethy et al. (2010) [40] with permission.
      
      Combining both frameworks, a list of outcome indicators was developed (Table&nbsp;2) against which each eligible study was assessed. To include not only the doctors’
         experience with patients after collecting PROs, but also the experience of other health
         services providers (i.e. nurses, allied health workers), the term ‘Patient-provider
         communication’ was used instead of ‘doctor patient communication’ as proposed by Greenhalgh
         et al. [25]. In order to answer review questions 2 &amp; 3 for the studies included, all possible
         explicit mediation effects were reviewed through examining if a path-analysis or a
         mediation-analysis by multiple, staged regression approach was presented in the paper.
         To examine potential moderating effect, each study was examined to determine if it
         explicitly tested the interaction effect/moderating effect, or inexplicitly conducted
         subgroup analysis. Significant possible mediating or moderating effect results were
         indicated as part of review endpoints in Table&nbsp;3. Inferences made and the discussion were based on these results.
      
      Table 2. Outcome indicators assessed for each eligible study included in the review
      Table 3. The characteristics of design and study quality
      Inclusion and exclusion criteria
      The inclusion criteria were: 1) substantial content in presenting empirical evidence
         on the impact of routinely collected PROs on at least one of the outcomes listed in
         Table&nbsp;2; 2) adult cancer patients; 3) conducted in an oncologic setting including inpatient,
         outpatient and outreach services; and 4) studies using a composite PRO. We defined
         a composite PRO as those PROs are often based on a well-developed instrument and with
         an aim for measuring a substantial aspect of patient conditions (or treatment) with
         at least 4 items. To reflect the demanding and complex nature of evaluating the impact
         of routine collected PROs, eligible studies included a variety of designs including,
         but not limited to, randomised controlled trials (RCTs), controlled before-after trials
         (CBA) and interrupted time series (ITS). ITS designs have a longitudinal character,
         with repeated measurements and at least three data points before and after the intervention
         point. Surveys and clinical audits were also included if the studies provided quantitative
         results relevant to the listed outcomes.
      
      Studies were excluded if they were non-English language articles, opinion and theoretical
         articles, historical descriptions, review articles, feasibility studies of some PROs
         collection devices, studies investigating child cancer patients or qualitative studies
         with no substantial quantitative results on the review endpoints.
      
      Data extraction and quality assessment
      Electronic search results were downloaded into EndNote bibliographic software. Two
         reviewers independently (JC, LO) screened all titles and abstracts of citations identified
         by the electronic search, applied the selection criteria to potentially relevant papers,
         and extracted data from included studies using a standardised form. Any disagreements
         concerning studies to be included were resolved by consensus.
      
      All studies were classified into two domains. Domain 1 correlated sample characteristics
         with population wide characteristics, and Domain 2 focused on study design. The data
         extraction form was adapted from other review studies using the outcome measures discussed
         above (see Table&nbsp;4). For each eligible study, a list was made including the leading author, country
         and jurisdiction, design, sample, outcome measures, the PROs used, times of feedback
         and intervention, members of medical teams given feedback, management plans offered
         to teams, and training (see Table&nbsp;5). All qualifying studies were listed chronologically with the outcome indicators
         (see Table&nbsp;3).
      
      Table 4. The components, rating criteria and symbol, and categories used in summarising the
            study evidence in the current study
      Table 5. The impact and effect sizes of the studies on patients, care providers and organisations*
      In Domain 1, the routinely collected PROs in particular participants or samples was
         classified as rated on a 4-point scale representing how closely the participants or
         samples overlapped with the characteristics and needs of the intended study populations(1
         star=very weakly related to 4 stars =very strong related). For example, for a study
         conducted in the US on a sample of lung cancer patients, the degree of overlap of
         the study sample with the characteristics of lung cancer patients in the US overall
         was assessed by considering the study setting, sample size and sampling frame, response
         rate, loss-to-follow-up, and characteristics of the study sample. In Domain 2, study
         design was classified and rated on 4 categories with 1 star indicating the weakest
         design and 4 stars indicating the strongest design. Four stars indicated a randomised
         trial or experimental study; 3 stars indicated a controlled trial, pre–post trial
         with control (controlled before–after trial), time series, or observational cohort
         with multivariable adjustment; 2 stars indicated a pre–post trial without control,
         observational cohort study without multivariable adjustment, cross-sectional study
         without multivariable adjustment, analysis of time trends without control, or well-designed
         qualitative study; and 1 star indicated a case series, other qualitative study, or
         survey (descriptive) study.
      
      Revised appraisal criteria were adapted from the guidelines on the assessment of quality
         improvement interventions [58,59]. A global rating was also created using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
         Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system [60]. The British Medical Journal has recommended the GRADE system since 2006 for grading
         evidence when submitting a clinical guidelines article. It has multiple advantages
         and is useful for systematic reviews and health technology assessments, as well as
         for evaluating research on clinical guidelines. The global rating created in the current
         study was based on the integration of the Domain 1 and Domain 2 ratings, as well as
         the intervention fidelity (the degree of success of the interventional strategy, the
         patients’ and providers’ adherence to the intervention strategy), dose–response gradient,
         precision and validity of outcomes (potential confounding factors and biases), and
         uncertainty of the direction of results. The global rating was divided into three
         categories; indication that the study should carry great (3 checks), moderate (2 checks),
         or little (1 check) weight when considering the strength of evidence (see Table&nbsp;4). Any experimental research that is reported in the manuscript was performed with
         the approval of an appropriate ethics committee.
      
      No attempt was made to quantitatively synthesize the results as the data were too
         heterogeneous to support pooling.
      
   

