Methods
   
      Chromosomal spreads for laser microdissection
      X. tropicalis chromosome nomenclature followed [20]. Metaphase spreads were prepared from euploid primary cell cultures of dissected
         testes as described in [20] with minor changes. Cells were trypsinized and hypotonized in 38 mM KCl for 5 min.
         After fixation, cell suspensions were stored overnight at −20°C. For laser microdissection,
         cells were dropped on a polyethylene naphthalene membrane (P.A.L.M. GmbH, Bernried,
         Germany) attached to a thin glass slide, allowed to dry, and stained with 3% Giemsa
         in H2O for 10 min.
      
      Laser microdissection
      Chromosomes were harvested as in [25]. Briefly, 15 copies of the p arm of chromosome 7 were microdissected and collected
         using a PALM MicroLaser system (P.A.L.M. GmbH, Bernried, Germany) coupled with an
         inverted microscope (Olympus) under an oil immersion objective (100× magnification).
         Chromosome arms were catapulted by a single laser pulse directly into the cap of a
         PCR tube containing 4 μL PCR oil. To ensure that the whole short arm of chromosome
         7 was obtained, the laser cut was targeted to the q arm border of the centromere region.
      
      Whole genome amplification
      An initial round of whole genome amplification was performed using the WGA4 GenomePlex Single Cell Kit (Sigma-Aldrich). Dissected chromosome arms were digested with Proteinase K, followed by library preparation
         and amplification according to manufacturer’s instructions. Primary PCR products were
         cleaned up using a Qiaquick Gel Extraction Kit (QIAGEN) column. 20 ng of primary WGA4
         product was then reamplified using the WGA3 system (GenomePlex WGA Reamplification Kit, Sigma-Aldrich) according to our original protocol for preparation of X. tropicalis painting probes [26]. The secondary PCR product was purified by ethanol precipitation, yielding approximately
         20 μg of DNA fragments averaging ~500–600 bp in size.
      
      High throughput sequencing and library construction
      In order to minimize resequencing WGA adaptors at ends of amplified fragments, libraries
         for high-throughput sequencing were constructed by in vitro transposition to simultaneously fragment the DNA and introduce sequencing primer/adaptors
         using the Nextera DNA sample prep kit (Illumina, Inc.) according to manufacturer’s
         instructions. 50 ng (measured by QuBit, Life Technology) of dissected chromosome amplification
         product DNA was used with Nextera Illumina-Compatible Enzyme Mix and low molecular
         weight buffer to generate libraries with fragment size of ~200 to 400 bp (including
         the 135 bp adapter sequence), and enriched by limited-cycle PCR. Library quality was
         determined by QuBit, Agilent Bioanalyser and QT-PCR using KAPA library quantification
         kit (KAPABiosystems, Boston, USA) before loading 6.5 pM on a lane of a GAII flow cell
         for sequencing 80 bp single reads.
      
      Data analysis
      Reads were mapped to Xenopus tropicalis v4.1 and v7.1 assemblies (available on http://www.xenbase.org webcite) [27] using Bowtie (http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net webcite) [28,29]. Due to prevalence of repeats in the X .tropicalis genome, only unique hits with higher than 97.5% identity were selected, using Bowtie
         parameters m=1 and v=2. The sequences obtained were counted and analyzed using PERL
         scripts and Microsoft Excel. Repetitive genomic regions were obtained from the UCSC
         (browser http://genome.ucsc.edu/ webcite).
      
      FISH-TSA (Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization with Tyramide Signal Amplification).
      
      Metaphase spreads for FISH-TSA analysis were prepared from the same euploid testes
         cell cultures as for the laser microdissection procedure, using the FISH-TSA protocol
         described in [30].
      
   

