Methods
   
      All cases included in this study were identified between January 2005 and August 2011
         and confirmed as positive for the H5N1 virus using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
         test by the laboratories of the Institut Pasteur, in either Phnom Penh or Ho Chi Minh.
         These cases had then been reported to the Centre for Communicable Diseases in the
         Cambodian Ministry of Health (MOH), Phnom Penh. Data for these patients was collected,
         with permission from the MOH, through review of medical records and interviews with
         staff at the admitting hospitals during a field visit in December 2011. A general
         study consent form was utilised for in-depth interviews. Verbal assent was used in
         place of written consent for information gathered in the hospital setting from shorter,
         less formal interactions.
      
      This study takes a societal perspective regarding the cost-of-illness for HPAI, meaning
         indirect costs to patients and their families are included in addition to medical
         provider costs [17]. This approach was taken in order to determine the full economic cost of illness.
         Data collection utilised an ingredients approach with micro-costing of key elements
         [17]. Costs were gathered in or converted, where necessary, to US dollars [18]. Whilst all reported patients originated in Cambodia and were reported to the Cambodian
         MOH, two patients were hospitalised in Vietnam. These cases were excluded from the
         cost-of-illness analysis since data, regarding some aspects of care and the associated
         costs, was not available. Adjustments were made by inflation or deflation to 2011
         parity using inflation rates cited by the International Monetary Fund and the Cambodian
         National Institute of Statistics [19,20]. The medical provider cost centres used in analysis were outpatient consultations,
         inpatient facility costs including capital and personnel costs, pharmaceuticals, diagnostic
         tests and oxygen administration. Diagnostic tests included viral PCR, anti-viral phenotypic
         testing, full blood counts, renal function tests (urea, creatinine, and other electrolytes),
         liver function tests, acute phase proteins as well as urine dipstick tests. The costs
         of full genomic sequencing of the viral strain and tests to detect antigenic drift
         were not included as these were assumed to be research related. The pharmaceuticals
         utilised were categorised as antivirals, antibiotics, antipyretics, corticosteroids
         or other medication. The costs centres attributed to the patient or family included
         travel expenses to the hospital of admission, food whilst hospitalised and the indirect
         cost of loss of income for the patient or caregiver due to hospitalisation. Information
         on treatment costs recovered from patients or organisations paying user fees on behalf
         of the patients was not available.
      
      WHO country specific unit costs, adjusted for inflation, were utilised in accounting
         for outpatient consultations at rural health services, public health centres, physicians’
         clinics and nurse visits [21]. Other costs were determined from data gathered in April-June 2012 from the Institut
         Pasteur, Ministry of Health, retail pharmacies and interviews with physicians and
         staff at hospitals in Kampot and Angkor Chey. In general, outpatient consultations
         and hospitalisation are represented by actual costs where as charges are utilised
         for pharmaceuticals and diagnostic tests due to the lack of cost data at the time
         of writing. Retail pharmacy pricing was utilised when data was unavailable from hospital
         visits. A recent study, commissioned by University Research Company assessing hospital
         costing and financial management, provided hospitalisation costs per bed day, excluding
         in kind drugs [22]. The values reported for bed per day are very similar to those cited by WHO data
         (adjusted for inflation) with a hospitalisation cost per day of $8 to $10 [22] compared to $7 to $9 [21]. Travel costs to the admitting hospital were derived using the University Research
         Co. model which takes into account not only distance travelled but also the quality
         of the roads [T Jordanwood, University Research Co., LLC, Cambodia, personal communication].
         With regard to lost income, this was calculated using a human-capital approach as
         a combination of both patient and caregiver earnings. It was assumed, based on employment
         statistics from the Cambodian National Institute of Statistics (NIS), that 74% of
         all caregivers and patients over the age of 18 years would be employed but only 20%
         of those aged between 6–18 years and no children under the age of six years [20]. It was also assumed that all children under the age of 6 years required the presence
         of a full-time caregiver; 50% of those aged 6–18 years had a caregiver present; and
         that no caregiver was present for those over the age of 18 years. Average income was
         based on NIS data and adjusted for inflation to US$237 per month, for a six day working
         week [20].
      
      A multi-variate sensitivity analysis was performed using the average cost of the case
         series as the baseline cost-of-illness. Upper and lower scenarios were developed for
         the patient care in order to determine the impact on the COI cost centres. The minimal
         care comparator was outpatient care only, including a single consultation and the
         average cost of outpatient medication whilst the maximum utilised the full battery
         of diagnostics and treatment, including a complete adult course of oseltamivir and
         higher cost hospitalisation in an intensive care unit [22].
      
      Ethics approval was obtained from the Cambodian National Ethics Committee for Health
         Research and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
      
   

