Methods
   
      Participants
      20 participants (12 females &amp; 8 males) aged between 18 and 50 (M = 27, SD = 8) were
         recruited from Southern Cross University (Coffs Harbour) campus. Participants were
         naive to the aims of the experiment. Participants had normal to corrected vision,
         none were anosmic, and none were ill at the time of testing. Informed written consent
         was obtained from all participants prior to experimentation. This study was conducted
         in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration and was approved by the Human Research
         Ethics Committee of Southern Cross University ECN-10-138.
      
      Materials
      Participants were seated in front of a Dell Trinitron flat-screen monitor at a viewing
         distance of 57&nbsp;cm in an unlit, sound-attenuated testing cubicle. Data was collected
         on a Pentium 4 processor. The display resolution of the monitor was set to 1,024 × 768
         pixels, it was calibrated for luminance, and had a refresh rate of 100&nbsp;Hz at 32 bit
         colour resolution. Participant responses were recorded using a Microsoft Wireless
         Multimedia Keyboard 1.0A. Participants signalled their responses (“male” or “female”)
         using the “m” and “z” keys, counter-balanced across participants.
      
      Visual stimuli
      PointLightLab (v4.0.13) custom-written software was used to generate the visual stimuli.
         The point-light walker stimuli used here were derived from examples of walkers taken
         from the gender-continuum developed by Troje (2002; Troje 2008). Detailed methods describing how the walkers of which that continuum is composed
         were created have been provided elsewhere (Troje 2008). In summary: Increments along the gender continuum were obtained first by integrating
         the gaits of 50 female and 50 male walkers. Then, using linear classifiers derived
         from the female and male subsets respectively, standard deviations from the mathematically
         average walker (represented as 0) were calculated to create walkers that were more
         female (increments below 0 on the continuum) and more male (increments above 0). Thus,
         increment 0 is the statistically neutral walker at the centre of the continuum and
         the statistical “sex” of each increment away from 0, both in the female and male directions
         along the continuum, was calculated.
      
      Using PointlightLab to generate animated point-light walkers based on Troje’s models
         this experiment used as test stimuli the most perceptually ambiguous female and male
         exemplars from that continuum. Pilot studies and other work from the laboratory had
         shown that on a 13 increment continuum, numbered from −6 (extreme female walker) to
         +6 (extreme male walker), the walkers at the −1 and 0 positions are most often judged
         as being the most sexually ambiguous. As noted above, the 0 walker is the statistically
         neutral walker. Observers typically report the 0 walker as looking slightly male (congruent
         with the so-called male-bias observed for point-light walkers: (Troje 2008); and for faces: (Davidenko 2007)) and so it was included here as a test stimulus because it represented to most ambiguous
         walker with perceptually male characteristics. This stimulus will be, here, described
         as the “ambiguous male” walker. The −1 walker on the continuum, the first walker with any female characteristics,
         is typically the increment closest to the perceptually neutral point on Troje’s continuum
         (van der Zwan et al. 2009; Troje 2008). In contrast to the 0 walker, this walker typically is reported by observers to
         look slightly female. It was included as a test stimulus here because it is the most
         ambiguous walker to carry slightly female characteristics. This stimulus will be,
         here, described as the “ambiguous female” walker.
      
      Both the ambiguous male and the ambiguous female walkers were constructed using 15
         white points defining the major joints of a human actor (wrists, elbows, shoulders,
         centre sternum, hips, middle pelvis, knees, ankles) plus three additional reference
         points (centre sternum, centre pelvic, and head). Each walker was presented on a black
         background. Walkers were orientated on the frontal plane so as to face away/towards
         the observer (direction-of-facing is, in objective terms at least perfectly ambiguous,
         but see also (Schouten et al. 2010)). Each walker was shown in motion, walking as if on a treadmill (they neither loomed
         nor receded). Each dot of which the models were composed subtended a visual angle
         of 0.3° and the PLWs stood 20.5° visual angle high and 6.5° wide. To reduce the ability
         of participants to monitor just a single spatial location PLWs were on each presentation
         positioned randomly within a pre-assigned region of uncertainty (a square 10° × 10°
         visual angle).
      
      Trials containing target stimuli had interspersed between them presentations of distractor
         walkers, each sexually unambiguous. Distractor walkers were constructed using exactly
         the same methods as the target stimuli but were chosen from more extreme locations
         on Troje’s (2002; Troje 2008) continuum to ensure they were not sexually ambiguous. Female and male distractors
         occurred with equivalent frequency. The target/distractor ratio was 0.22.
      
      Olfactory stimuli
      Lundstrom and Olsson (2005) demonstrated that congruency between the environment and a pheromone-like chemosensory
         cue is important for behavioural effects to be conveyed via olfaction. Because there
         was only one male experimenter running the trials it was decided that using a female
         chemosensory cue (sweat) could be confounded by the overall conditions. For this reason
         congruency between the environment (male experimenter) and the olfactory cue used
         was maintained and only male sweat was used.
      
      The criteria and donor requirements for sweat collection were based on methods used
         by Zhou and Chen (2009). Fresh sweat samples were collected each day of testing in order to minimise bacterial
         growth and the consequent odour. Each time, samples were taken from two of three possible
         donors using cotton pads taped under the arms and to the abdomens of the male donors
         while they exercised (running or cycling for 40 – 60 mins). For 24&nbsp;h prior to collection,
         donors avoided consuming foods known to add odorants to sweat (eg garlic, chilli,
         asparagus). For that same period they abstained from having sex, and from applying
         deodorants or strong scented soaps. All male sweat donors were healthy adults with
         no medical conditions and were taking no medications. Donors were also required to
         be available to participate for the duration of the study.
      
      Fifteen minutes before testing commenced the sweat-soaked cotton pads were collected
         and placed into an opaque plastic bowl that was then placed in the testing cubicle
         behind the computer monitor, 80-100&nbsp;cm from the participant. The container was placed
         out of the direct line-of-sight of the participant to avoid potentially priming participants
         as to the purpose of the experiment. Sweat pads from more than one donor always were
         combined to avoid the possibility of interactions between an individual donor and
         participants.
      
      Procedure
      Participants completed the sex-discrimination task on two separate occasions: Once
         for the non-olfactory condition (no sweat cue) and once with the olfactory (sweat)
         cue present. On all occasions participants were kept naïve as to the nature of the
         experiment, specifically that it included an olfactory manipulation. The order of
         the two conditions was counter-balanced across participants.
      
      Upon arrival at the laboratory participants were asked to sit in front of a computer
         screen in an unlit cubicle. Lundstrom and Olsson (2005) previously have reported that some effects are contingent on social context and
         that effects mediated by male olfactory cues are most effective when the experimenter
         is male. For that reason a male experimenter was used on all occasions. Having given
         instructions and answered any questions the experimenter immediately left the testing
         cubicle and closed the door. The experimenter then monitored proceedings using a slave
         monitor in an adjacent room. Presentation protocol comprised a 3&nbsp;second blank grey
         pre-stimulus screen followed by a 1000&nbsp;msec presentation of a walker (one complete
         2-step walking cycle). Participants recorded their response in a post-stimulus 5&nbsp;second
         interval. Participants completed on each occasion two blocks of trials, each composed
         of 11 different walkers (2 target walkers, 9 distractors) each repeated 5 times. Participants
         were given a short break between blocks of trials.
      
      Having completed their first session participants arranged to return, a week later,
         for a second testing session where the procedures were repeated. The olfactory cue
         was present at only one session but on all occasions identical plastic containers
         to the one in which pads were stored was in place behind the computer monitor – a
         measure implemented (in spite of participants’ naivety to the olfactory manipulation)
         to provide the most stringent possible control across conditions.
      
      After the second testing session participants were debriefed without being told of
         the aim of the experiment or of the presence or otherwise of the olfactory cue. All
         were questioned, during debriefing, about their visual, auditory, temperature, and
         olfactory experiences as an observer. No participant reported any awareness of unusual
         odours or odorants in the testing room.
      
   

