Methods
   
      Design
      This is a prospective cross-sectional cohort study. The medical records of two no-trauma
         ICUs were reviewed in search of adult patients with an ICU stay ≥24 between December
         1, 2005 and December 1, 2006. Twenty-four months after discharge, all survivors were
         contacted by phone. All living patients who agreed to participate were included in
         the study.
      
      Study population
      The study included patients from two ICUs: a 31-bed, closed ICU in a private hospital;
         and an 18-bed, open ICU in a university hospital. Patients with ICU stay &lt; 24&nbsp;hours
         were excluded. If the patient was readmitted to the ICU during the year in review,
         only data relating to the first admission were considered. The number of readmissions
         was measured only for sample characterization.
      
      Assessment of PFS
      PFS was assessed by the Karnofsky Performance Status Scale, which emphasizes physical
         performance and dependency. As a means to monitor the results obtained with the Karnosfky
         scale (since it is expected that poor physical status will entail decreased ability
         to perform ADLs), the Lawton-Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) Scale
         [23-26] was also applied. Karnofsky and Lawton scores were determined during ICU admission
         (K-ICU and L-ICU) and after 24&nbsp;months (K-24mo and L-24mo).
      
      Data collection
      Daily records made by ICU physicians and fellows during the admission were reviewed.
         The following data were collected: baseline characteristics, age, gender, body mass
         index (BMI), pre-existing diseases, type of admission (medical, planned surgery or
         unplanned surgery), acute physiologic and chronic health evaluation (APACHE II) score
         at 1st ICU-day, and diagnosis on ICU admission. K-ICU score, L-ICU score, data on
         respiratory, cardiovascular, and dialysis treatments, diagnosis of sepsis, days on
         mechanical ventilation (MV), ICU-length of stay (LOS), sequential organ failure assessment
         (SOFA), and therapeutic intervention score (TISS) were also retrieved from the medical
         charts.
      
      Two years after ICU discharge, patients were contacted via telephone. If the patient
         was unable to answer the telephone interview, the questions were answered by a proxy,
         if possible the same person providing information during the ICU admission. Proxies
         were defined as people with daily contact with the patient since before admission
         to the ICU.
      
      The interviews were performed by one physician and six nurses. They were trained to
         use the study instruments and participated in a pilot study with 100 patients [6]. Periodic evaluations were performed to determine inter-rater reliability and to
         make sure that the quality of interviews remained similar/high among data collectors.
      
      In addition to the Karnosfky and Lawton-IADL scales, the telephone interview focused
         on the patient’s self-perception about their quality of life (a subjective question
         to test the reliability of the scales used).
      
      Data classification
      Changes in physical performance (K-ICU vs. K-24mo) and ability to perform daily activities
         (L-ICU vs. L-24mo) were categorized as: (a) functional improvement – increase in at
         least one of the scores over 24&nbsp;months; (b) preserved functional status – no change
         in scores; (c) moderate functional impairment – reduction of up to 29 points in K-24mo
         vs. K-ICU and reduction of up to 11 points in L-24mo vs. L-ICU; and (d) major functional
         impairment – reduction ≥ 30 points in K-24mo vs. K-ICU, and ≥ 12 points in L-24mo
         vs. L-ICU.
      
      As a final question, patients were asked to rate their PFS at 24&nbsp;months as compared
         to PFS during ICU-stay (worse, equal, or better).
      
      Ethics
      The study was approved by the ethics committees at Hospital Moinhos de Vento and Complexo
         Hospitalar da Santa Casa de Porto Alegre. Oral consent was provided at the start of
         the telephone interview.
      
      Statistical analysis
      Categorical variables were reported as percentages, and between-group comparisons
         were made by chi-square test. Continuous variables were reported as means ± SD when
         variables were normally distributed or as medians and interquartile [P25-P75] range when variables were not normally distributed. Differences between group means
         were compared by Student t test for normally distributed variables. Chi-square tests or Fisher exact test were
         used to compare group medians for non-normally distributed variables.
      
      A Kaplan-Meier curve was built to show patient survival. Adjusted residuals were used
         to evaluate associations between categorical variables and outcome. A paired Student
         t test for quantitative variables was used to evaluate pre and post ICU scores. ANOVA
         followed by the Tukey test evaluated the association of APACHE II with four categories
         of the Karnofsky and Lawton-ADL indices. To examine the association of the SOFA score
         with the scale categories, the Kruskal-Wallis test was used, followed by the Tukey
         test. The analysis was adjusted for BMI, days on MV, type of ICU admission, age, pre-existing
         diseases, Glasgow coma score, and SOFA. In multivariate analyses, the predictors of
         functional status decline were expressed as relative risk (RR).
      
      The analyses were performed with SPSS 16.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA),
         and level of significance was set at p &lt;0.05.
      
   

