Methods
   
      Data
      We were supplied with a dataset by the NHS Information Centre for the purpose of statistical
         modelling of the new SHMI indicator, including the impact of case-mix adjustment variables
         and the variability of the measure over time. The dataset comprised of all admissions
         to English hospitals from the Hospital Episode Statistics (HES) data warehouse for
         spells which ended between 01/04/2005 and 30/09/2010. Date of death data supplied
         by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) was linked to the hospital episode data
         set and deaths within 30&nbsp;days of discharge were identified. All patient data provided
         was anonymised prior to receipt by the authors.
      
      We followed the previously described methodology for processing the linked hospital
         episode data before calculating the SHMI [11,12]. Briefly, this involved excluding maternity admissions, day case admissions, and
         admissions to private and community hospitals. We also excluded admissions to 72 Specialist
         trusts. There was no formal definition of General/Specialist status and we took the
         definition of general trusts from lists reported by other mortality indicator providers.
      
      Categories were created for all variables. Age was split into 5&nbsp;year age bands except
         for infants aged 0–1 and preschool children aged 1–4. A comorbidity score was derived
         by converting secondary diagnosis codes into the 19 clinical conditions identified
         in the Charlson comorbidity index [13], with contemporary weights for the presence of individual conditions contribution
         to the overall score [14]. The Index of Multiple Deprivation rank (an area level deprivation measure derived
         from the patient’s postcode) was reported by HES and grouped by fifths. Type of admission
         was grouped into emergency and elective.
      
      The reason for admission was identified from the ICD10 code in the first diagnosis
         field, and collapsed into the diagnostic groups given by the Agency for Healthcare
         Research and Quality [15]. Diagnosis groups were then combined into the 138 groups used in the calculation
         of the SHMI [12]. It has previously been reported that the mean c statistic over all diagnosis groups
         in the SHMI model was 0.830 (range 0.534 – 0.970) and that the coefficient of determination
         R2 showed the SHMI model accounted for 81% over the total variability [12].
      
      Statistical methods
      We estimated the probability of death in hospital or within 30&nbsp;days of discharge for
         all completed admissions for the period 01/04/2005 to 30/09/2010 by fitting logistic
         regression models using the SHMI covariates (age, sex, method of admission and comorbidity)
         within diagnosis group. We accounted for the effect of seasonal variation in hospital
         admissions by including an extra categorical variable for month of admission in each
         of the logistic regression models. We then summed these probabilities predicted by
         the model over all diagnosis groups and for each trust for each consecutive 3&nbsp;month
         period to obtain the expected number of deaths per trust for each quarter. The ratio
         of the observed number in each quarter to the expected is equivalent to indirect standardisation
         [16]. Fitting one model to the data from all five years combined means that we can make
         valid comparisons over time. This is because we calculate one set of case-mix weights
         for all time periods instead of the weights changing over time (which would be the
         case if separate models were fitted for each year or quarter).
      
      We plotted the quarterly values of the SHMI, expected number of deaths and observed
         number deaths in all hospitals against time for the five year period. Coding levels
         of the comorbidity variable have changed over this time period so we examined the
         effect of removing comorbidity from the model so that we could be sure any trends
         identified were not a result of these changes. Further analyses examined the quarterly
         changes in SHMI in subgroups of age, sex, admission method, index of deprivation and
         comorbidity. As the SHMI model adjusts for age, sex, admission method and comorbidity
         we would not expect to see differences in the overall SHMI between the subgroups.
         However, trend is not adjusted for in the SHMI model so we can investigate any differences
         between subgroups in terms of their time trend.
      
      We estimated the linear trend in individual hospital SHMIs by ordinary least squares
         regression of the 22 quarterly SHMIs on time. The regression coefficients were plotted
         on a funnel plot with control lines calculated in a conventional manner [17,18], Winsorising the 20% most extreme values to examine whether there were any extremes
         in the rate of change.
      
   

