Methods
   
      Study design
      We carried out a cross sectional population based study which enrolled 1200 community
         dwelling elderly individuals aged 65&nbsp;years and above, living in rural areas of seven
         out of the eight Mohafazat in Lebanon.
      
      Sample size calculation
      The sample was selected through multistage cluster sampling. The sample size has been
         established according to the prevalence of home-living elderly people, either suffering
         from malnutrition or considered at risk of malnutrition (average 40%). These results
         are based on a review of 48 studies including either healthy or frail elderly individuals
         [19] and a retrospective study of pooled data [20] based on the Mini-Nutritional-Assessment (MNA) [21]. Although some of the study samples were of convenience nature and mainly focused
         on European population, we considered these results as the most appropriate for our
         sample calculation, as representative data from developing countries are lacking.
         A minimum of 1024 subjects was necessary to establish a 95% confidence interval, with
         an accuracy of +/− 3%, taking clustering into account. Due to possible missing values
         in several items, a final sample size of 1200 elderly was chosen.
      
      Subjects and setting
      Lebanon is divided into eight Mohafazat (governorates); each of them consists of several
         districts (Caza) forming a total of 25 Caza. As our study included only rural elderly
         subjects, the Caza of Beirut (urban area) was excluded. In each of the remaining 24
         Caza (stratum), two villages were randomly selected from the list of villages provided
         by the Central Agency of Statistics in Lebanon, except for two Caza where only one
         large village was selected giving a total of 46 villages [22]. Within each village, a random sample of 25 elderly individuals was drawn from the
         small villages and 50 from the larger villages, based on the list of households provided
         by the municipality or other local authority. A replacement list was prepared in case
         of absence or refusal of participation. The inclusion criteria were: to be at least
         65&nbsp;years old, to live at home in rural areas, to be free from terminal illness and
         not tube fed. The study received the approval of the ethics committee of St Josephs
         University of Beirut.
      
      Questionnaire
      The study was based on a comprehensive multi-component questionnaire, administrated
         by trained interviewers, including the assessment tools as described below. The questionnaire
         was translated back and forth from French to Arabic by two persons fluent in both
         languages. People were questioned after oral consent at their place of residence.
         Written consent was not considered necessary because it was an observational study.
         Also, participants remained anonymous and individual results were kept confidential.
         A pilot study including 100 individuals was performed previously in order to pretest
         the feasibility of the questionnaire. According to the results, some minor changes
         were made. The interview duration of 40–50&nbsp;minutes was considered acceptable. If the
         participant was unable to answer, the help of a family member was required. The main
         survey was conducted over a period of 12&nbsp;months between April 2011 and April 2012.
      
      Assessment tools
      Socio-demographic factors
      The variables recorded included demographic characteristics (age, gender, marital
         status, village of residence) and living conditions (living alone or with others).
         Information about the financial situation was recorded by two questions: one question
         regarding the personal monthly income which, according to the national minimum wages,
         was categorized into &lt; 300.000 LL (~200 USD), 300.000 – 600.000 LL and &gt; 600.000 LL
         (~400 USD). According to a survey conducted by the Central Administration of Statistics
         of Lebanon in 2004, about 8,7% of Lebanese adults live below the extreme poverty line
         corresponding to an annual income of 2400 USD (200 USD monthly) per household [23]. The second question asked about financial dependency from children, with answers
         ranging between “totally dependent, partially dependent or independent”. Information
         about educational level was obtained using the following categories: illiteracy, less
         or at least 8&nbsp;years schooling (primary school), less or at least brevet (middle school),
         less or at least high school graduation and university level. Regarding the main occupation,
         individuals were questioned about the longest occupation held, which was categorized
         into: farmer, employee or manager, self-employed, without work (including housework);
         they were also asked if they were still working. The question about health insurance
         was categorized into three groups: without insurance, private insurance, national
         social security fund (NSSF) and others.
      
      Anthropometric measures and nutritional status
      Weight was taken in light indoor clothes without shoes by electronic digital scale
         to the nearest 0.1&nbsp;kg, whereas height was measured in standing position to the nearest
         0.1&nbsp;cm. Body Mass Index (BMI) was computed as [weight (kg)/height (m2)]. Nutritional status was assessed by the MNA in its Arabic version [24]. The MNA, developed by Guigoz et al. [25], is the most established, best validated and widespread nutritional assessment tool
         used among geriatric population [26]. It has been translated into more than 20 languages and is cited in nearly 200 publications.
         The MNA includes 18 questions regarding anthropometric, general, dietetic, and subjective
         assessment. Based on the total score, subjects were classified into three categories:
         malnourished (&lt;17), at nutritional risk (17 ≤ score &lt; 24), adequate nutritional status
         (≥ 24) [25].
      
      Health characteristics
      Health related characteristics were assessed by self related health status (SRH) based
         on a 5 item scale. This measure has shown to be a reliable indicator for overall health
         status [27] in developed countries but also in most Arabic countries [28]. Comorbidities were recorded by asking participants if they suffered from chronic
         physician-diagnosed conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, etc. Drug intake was
         estimated by the number of drugs taken daily on a regular basis as prescribed by a
         physician and checked with packages shown to the interviewer. Furthermore, the participants
         were questioned about chronic pain (yes/no), defined as feeling pain for at least
         3&nbsp;months, insomnia (no or occasionally/often or always) as well as recent hospitalization
         (&lt;1&nbsp;year). Frailty was assessed by the SOF (Study of Osteoporotic Fractures) frailty Index [29], which included 3 items: involuntary weight loss for one year, inability to rise
         from a chair without using arms and reduced energy level for at least 3&nbsp;days during
         the past week. Based on the original SOF frailty index, frailty status was defined
         as robust (0 component), pre-frail (1 component), and frail (2 or more components).
         Oral health assessment included three dichotomous questions about chewing problems,
         total or partial loss of dentition and wearing dental prosthesis. Finally, tobacco
         use was estimated by asking about current smoking, whereas the level of physical exercise
         was assessed by estimating the frequency and duration of exercise (excluding housework)
         by “a minimum of 30&nbsp;min daily”, “occasionally” or “never”.
      
      Functional status
      Functional status was investigated through the Activities of Daily Living (ADL), a
         5-item scale commonly used in comprehensive geriatric assessment evaluating the basic
         activities like bathing, toileting, clothing, walking and eating by his/her own [30]. This scale was validated in its Arabic version by Nasser &amp; Doumit [31] in a sample of Lebanese elderly living in nursing homes. Continence was not considered
         in this scale because difficulties in bladder or bowel control reflect an abnormality
         in a particular physical system and should therefore be considered as impairment rather
         than a disability [32]. According to several authors [33,34], we defined three main groups: “not disabled” was defined as independent in all 5
         ADL, “moderately disabled” as dependent in one or two items, “severely disabled” as
         dependent in three or more items. The Instrumental ADL (IADL) included four activities:
         telephone use, use of transportation, responsibility for drugs intake and budget management.
         This 4 item IADL scale has been shown to be associated with cognitive impairment in
         community dwelling elderly subjects [35]. Individuals were considered as fully independent (coded 0) if they could perform
         the IADL item without any help, otherwise they were considered partially dependent
         (coded 1). The final score, ranging from 0 to 4, was computed by summing the number
         of IADL dependencies for these four items. Subjects without telephone (n = 288) as
         well as subjects free of drug intake (n = 152) were not considered in the analysis.
         Balance disorder was assessed by the “one-leg balance” test, a useful screening tool
         of fall risk among elderly individuals [36]. Subjects were asked to stay on one leg without using their arms. Moreover, participants
         were asked if they experienced one or more falls during the past year.
      
      Psychosocial and cognitive status
      Mental status was assessed by the 5 item Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-5), a dichotomized
         5- item scale (score ranges from 0–5) allowing to detect depressive disorder in elderly
         people [37]. Presence of depressive symptoms was defined as a score of two or above [37]. The 5-item WHO Well Being Index [38] was used to assess the mood of our study sample, as this instrument had previously
         been validated in the Arabic version by Sibai et al. [38] among Lebanese elderly. The WHO-5 Arabic version allows the detection of depression
         among Lebanese elderly at a cut-off point less than 13 [38]. Cognitive status was assessed by the Mini-mental-state (MMS) examination [39], the most commonly used screening tool for cognitive impairment worldwide. In order
         to take into account the high level of illiteracy, we constructed a modified version
         adapted to illiterate subjects (MMS 2), whereas the original MMS (MMS 1) translated
         in Arabic language was used for literate elderly. In the MMS 2 form, question 28 including
         a written order (“Close your eyes”) was replaced by the same order but given verbally
         (the interviewer asks the subject to close the eyes). Furthermore, regarding question
         29, where the patient is required to write a sentence, the participant was asked to
         construct a sentence orally including a subject, a verb and an object. As no cut-off
         points were defined in Lebanese elderly, the results were divided into quartiles.
         To investigate the social network we used the Lubben Social Network Scale 6 (LSNS
         6) as described by Lubben et al. [40]. This tool is an abbreviated version of the original LSNS scale [41], which was especially developed for elderly populations and has been shown to be
         associated with a wide range of health indicators. The LSNS 6 is based on 3 questions
         assessing the family network, as follows: “How many relatives do you see or hear from at least once a month? How many relatives
            do you feel close to such that you could call on them for help? How many relatives
            do you feel at ease with that you can talk to about private matters?” These same questions are repeated by replacing the word “relatives” with the word
         “friends”. The answers were as follows: none (coded 0), one (coded 1), two (coded
         2) three or four (coded 3), five to eight (coded 4), nine or more (coded 5). The total
         score is the sum of the 6 items, ranging from 0 to 30. According to the author [40], at a score below 12, the person is considered as at risk for social isolation. Subjective
         loneliness was assessed by the modified version of the Jong- Gierveld Loneliness Scale
         as described by Wilson et al. [42]. This 5 item scale included the following: “I experience a general sense of emptiness,” “I miss having people around,” “I feel
            like I don’t have enough friends,” “I often feel abandoned,” and “I miss having a
            really good friend”. As Wilson [42], we used a dichotomous scale where “yes” was scored for 1 and “no” for 0. Following the authors’ instruction, higher values indicated more loneliness.
      
      Statistical analysis
      The Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) version 19.0 was used to enter
         and analyze data. Cluster effect was taken into account when computing confidence
         intervals, according to Rumeau-Rouquette et al. [43]. Percentages were used to present nominal variables, while means and standard deviations
         were applied for presenting continuous variables. The Chi Square test was used for
         cross tabulation of qualitative variables in bivariate analysis, while the Student
         T test was used to compare the means between genders.
      
   

