Methods
   
      Generating HMM profiles
      Previously identified putative orthologs that were present in the common ancestor
         of the bilaterians Homo sapiens, Drosophila melanogaster, and Caenorhabditis elegans were used as a focus for the present study [2,4]. For each of those families described, additional members belonging to various bilaterians
         that had well annotated genomes were collected from databases such as NCBI refseq
         [30] and Swissprot [31]. Both, similarity based searches as well as key-word based searches were used to
         retrieve the sequences. These families were further augmented with additional validated
         gene members described in the literature [3,4,32-34]. These sequences were aligned using the MUSCLE multiple sequence aligner program.
         The Hidden–Markov model (HMM) profiles for each of these families were created with
         the hmmbuild option of the HMMER 3.0 [35] package. The reference sequences were obtained from diverse taxa in order to make
         the profiles more representative of the genomes chosen for study.
      
      Obtaining eukaryotic protein datasets
      The protein datasets of completely sequenced organisms representing all major eukaryotic
         clades were downloaded from NCBI, Ensembl, JGI, and Sanger. The downloaded genomes
         were then categorized into various class/phyla based on NCBI taxonomy information.
         Complete lists of the included species are given in Additional file 5, and the sources for these genomes along with their build numbers are provided in
         Additional file 6. The obtained genomes were sorted taxonomically into 4 groups as protists, plants,
         fungi and metazoans.
      
      HMM profile search
      Whole predicted proteomes of the various species were scanned with all created HMM
         profiles using the hmmsearch option of the HMMER 3.0 package using minimum e-value threshold of 0.001. A loop
         written in Bash script was used to complete the reiterative hmmsearch procedure and the processing of results. For each HMM-genome pair, sequence hits
         were sorted based on the score for the full sequence and then on the best domain score.
         Only those sequences that had scores greater than 100 were chosen to be used in BLAST
         searches (standalone BLAST version 2.2.25. from NCBI) [7].
      
      BLAST search
      Standalone BLAST was performed using the chosen sequences against a local sequence
         database consisting only of the well annotated, complete set of genes from Homo sapiens, Drosophila melanogaster, and Caenorhabditis elegans. Subsequently, no more than 3 best hits from these focused BLAST results were scanned
         for accession numbers that matched a master list of such numbers. This master list
         was constructed using only those genes from the three reference organisms that were
         members of a given HMM profile/family. This pairwise process was repeated for each
         profile and each genome. Only the sequences that identified the correct family as
         verified by the master list accession numbers were chosen as family members.
      
      Increasing specificity
      The process was repeated two more times after adding the identified members from the
         previous round to generate a new HMM profile for the family. In order to increase
         the specificity of ortholog detection, during the second round, separate HMM profiles
         were generated for each of four taxonomic clades protists, fungi, plants, and metazoans.
         For those families for which the sequence data was not available for different clades,
         general profiles were again used in the second round after updating the HMM profile
         with new sequences.
      
      We carefully re-examined all the species lacking families that were otherwise present
         in closely related species of the group/clade. To make sure that these families were
         likely to be missing rather than just difficult to identify not because of the poor
         quality of the proteome or poor annotation, we performed a focused blastp/tblastn
         search of these proteomes/genomes using sequences from closely related species. If
         no members were found after two rounds of HMM profile search and focussed BLAST search,
         the family was declared missing from the species. All the sequences identified as
         orthologs in the respective family were then catalogued. Those families that had multiple
         members were then analysed to determine whether they were truly parologous or just
         duplicate sequences by aligning them using clustalw software [36].
      
   

