Methods
   
      Since 1994, the Rakai Health Sciences Program has followed an open cohort of about
         12,000 participants aged 15 to 49&nbsp;years in 50 communities in the Rakai district of
         southwestern Uganda. The cohort has been described in detail elsewhere [9,10]. In brief, participants provide consent and are interviewed privately by interviewers
         of the same gender every 10 to 14&nbsp;months, using a standardized questionnaire. Venous
         blood is collected for HIV-1 testing. More than 90% of eligible individuals participate
         in any given survey round.
      
      Women who participated in the study between 2000 and 2009 were included in analyses
         if they reported at least one sexual partner during the study period and if they had
         provided any data on whether they experienced IPV during the study period.
      
      Intimate partner violence (IPV) was defined as any physical, sexual, or verbal violence
         by a partner in an intimate relationship. Questions on IPV were modified from the
         Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (CTS2), and, in some analyses, type of IPV was classified
         as minor or severe as per the CTS2 [11,12]. Minor physical violence was defined as a husband or partner who had “pushed you,
         pulled you, slapped you or held you down,” and severe physical violence questions
         were having had a husband or partner who “punched you with a fist or with something
         that could hurt you,” “kicked you or dragged you,” “tried to strangle you or burn
         you,” or “attacked you with a knife, gun or other weapon.” Minor verbal violence was
         defined as a husband or partner having “verbally abused or shouted at you” and severe
         verbal violence was defined as a husband or partner who had “threatened you with a
         knife, gun, or other weapon.” Sexual violence was defined as a sexual partner having
         “used verbal threats to force you to have sex when you did not want to,” “physically
         forced you to have sex when you did not want to,” or “forced you to perform other
         sexual acts you did not want to do,” and all of these types of sexual violence were
         considered severe. Data were collected in all survey rounds on experiences of IPV
         in the current year, and in one survey round on experiences of all three forms of
         IPV ever. Data were collected on frequency of IPV in the past year for physical and
         verbal IPV in four survey rounds, and for sexual IPV in three survey rounds.
      
      Potential risk factors for IPV were determined based on the literature and on which
         data were collected for the RCCS between 2000 and 2009. Since characteristics and
         experiences in early life may cause some of the characteristics and experiences in
         adulthood, and specifically, risk factors for IPV in adulthood may be on the causal
         pathway from early factors to IPV [13], risk variables were separated into early factors and contemporary factors, with
         early factors defined as variables that may affect women early in life (i.e. in childhood or in early adulthood) and contemporary factors defined as variables
         that may affect women in their current lives. These two groups of variables were analysed
         separately.
      
      Early factors included sexual abuse in childhood or adolescence [6], age at first intercourse [14,15], whether first intercourse was coerced, and education level [4,6,15-22]. Childhood or adolescent sexual abuse was defined as having ever been sexually abused
         by a male before the age of 18, and was only asked about in one survey round. Age
         at first intercourse was taken from the round in which this question was first answered.
         Coerced first intercourse was defined as force having been used the first time a participant
         had sex, and was coded as yes if the participant indicated in any survey round that
         their first sex had been coerced. Education level was taken from the baseline survey
         round, i.e. from the first round of participation during the period under study.
      
      Contemporary factors included demographic variables such as age [4,16-21,23-25], marital status [4,6,20-25], religion [16,19,22,25], occupation [4,21,25], partner’s occupation, and pregnancy status [5,20,23]; relationship variables such as type of relationship with partner [20], length of primary sexual partnership [20,24], difference in age between the participant and her partner [17,18,20,24,25], number of sexual partners in the past year [14-16,19,21,23,26-28], alcohol use before sex by the participant [14,18,26], alcohol use before sex by the participant’s partner [6,17,25], attitudes toward violence, and HIV status [4,6,15,17,20,21,23-25,29]. Pregnancy status was self-reported. A variable for attitudes toward violence was
         derived from a series of questions about whether a man is justified in beating his
         wife or partner in several situations, with acceptable defined as responding yes to
         any of these questions and not acceptable defined as responding no to all these questions,
         which were: she neglects household responsibilities, she disobeys the instructions
         of her husband/elders, she uses contraception without permission, she refuses her
         husband sex, he learns about his wife’s partner’s positive HIV serostatus, he learns
         about his positive HIV serostatus, argues over money, is unfaithful, or another reason.
         HIV status was defined as a positive result on two enzyme immunoassays, confirmed
         by Western blot or RT-PCR.
      
      For participants who reported multiple partners in the past year, data about the partner
         with whom the participant reported having had sex most recently was used for the variables
         type of relationship with partner, alcohol use by partner, length of sexual partnership,
         and difference in age with partner; it was not possible to determine which specific
         partner (if any) had perpetrated violence.
      
      Statistical methods
      The prevalence of IPV and of potential IPV risk factors was assessed. To identify
         early factors, logistic regression was used to estimate the bivariate and multivariable
         odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) associated with violence during
         the period of study participation. For contemporary factors, population-averaged logistic
         regression models were used to look at bivariate and multivariable associations [30], which account for repeated measures for each participant, using an exchangeable
         correlation matrix and a robust variance estimator, and modelling the associations
         between each variable and IPV in the subsequent year.
      
      For each of early factors and contemporary factors, since there were multiple predictors
         of interest and to minimize the risk of Type I error of conventional backward selection
         models, an Allen-Cady modified backward selection procedure was used for the multivariable
         models [31]. Candidate variables were identified a priori as being of greater importance on the basis of known associations with violence,
         including sexual abuse in childhood or adolescence, coerced first sex, and education
         for early factors, and age, marital status, pregnancy status, difference in age with
         partner, use of alcohol, number of partners in past year, and attitudes toward violence
         for contemporary factors [2,27,32]. Additional variables hypothesized to be relevant were then ranked in order of putative
         importance, which in ascending order of importance for contemporary factors were relationship
         type, length of relationship, woman’s occupation, partner’s occupation, religion,
         and HIV status. For early variables, this included only age at first sex. Variables
         from the second group were deleted in order of ascending importance, i.e. age at first sex for early factors and beginning with relationship type for contemporary
         factors, until the first variable was encountered with a p value of p &lt; 0.1, either
         by Wald test or by likelihood ratio test, depending on whether the variable was continuous,
         binary, or categorical.
      
      Separate models were run to look at the associations between contemporary factors
         and risk of violence in the same year, in consideration of the fact that certain associations,
         such as the temporal association between pregnancy and violence, might not be adequately
         captured when looking at exposure and outcome data from sequential years. Analyses
         were done using Stata 12.
      
      During the period under study, the Rakai Community Cohort Study was approved by institutional
         review boards at the Scientific and Ethics Committee of the Uganda Virus Research
         Institute, the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology, Columbia University,
         Johns Hopkins University, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, and the
         Western. Ethics approval was obtained for this analysis from the University of Toronto.
      
   

