Methods
   
      Literature search
      This meta-analysis was conducted according to guidelines for diagnostic meta-analysis
         [23,24]. PubMed, Embase and the Wanfang database were searched in Oct 2012 using the strategy
         of (circulating tumor cell OR circulating tumor cells OR CTC or CTCs OR isolated/circulating/disseminated
         tumor cells OR ITC) AND (Gastric cancer or Gastric Neoplasms or Stomach Cancer) without
         time or language restrictions. The references of the included studies were also searched
         manually to identify additional eligible studies.
      
      Inclusion and exclusion criteria
      The inclusion criteria for this meta-analysis were: 1) studies about the diagnosis
         of gastric cancer with CTCs detection; 2) studies with raw data that true-positive,
         false-positive, false-negative and true-negative could be found or calculated; 3)
         studies with reference standard for the diagnosis of gastric cancer; 4) studies with
         more than 20 patients. Exclusion criteria were: 1) studies with duplicate data reported
         in other studies; 2) studies that were letters, editorials, case reports or case series.
      
      Data extraction and quality assessment
      The two investigators (Lanhua Tang, Shushan Zhao) independently reviewed the titles
         and abstracts of all the records searched above, and excluded the reviews, editorials,
         letters, case reports or case series, and studies without direct link to the main
         subject. For records which could not be evaluated through the titles and abstracts,
         full texts were retrieved for detailed evaluation according to the inclusion and exclusion
         criteria. Disagreements were resolved by discussion with the senior investigator (Meizuo
         Zhong). The reasons why studies were excluded were listed.
      
      Two reviewers independently extracted data from all the eligible studies: 1) basic
         characteristics of studies including name of the first author, year of the publication,
         country of origin, markers of CTCs detection methods, mean/median age, diagnosis criteria
         of gastric cancer, tumor stage distribution of patients, source of control; 2) methods
         of studies including study design, methods of the inclusion of patients and controls,
         methods of CTCs detection, the blood volume, time and methods of sample collection;
         3) outcomes including the number of patients with true or false positive and true
         or false negative results, detection SEN. If the data of the results were not directly
         reported, they were calculated based on SEN and SPE or positive and negative predictive
         value. Disagreements were resolved by discussion and consultation with the senior
         investigator (Meizuo Zhong).
      
      Subsequently, the two independent authors evaluated the quality of the studies by
         Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 (QUADAS-2) [25] and Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy (STARD) [26].
      
      Data analysis
      This systematic review and meta-analysis about the diagnostic accuracy of CTCs detection
         in gastric cancer was performed using Stata software (version 12.0, College Station,
         TX) with the MIDAS and METANDI modules and RevMan (version 5.1).
      
      With regards to Stata software, continuity correction was implemented by an addition
         of 1 to avoid the trouble that the cells containing zero values might bring to the
         analysis process. And when a study adopted several markers for the CTCs detection,
         the marker with the best SPE or the best SEN was used for the analysis of the pooled
         diagnostic accuracy.
      
      By using a bivariate regression approach, the summary receiver operating characteristic
         (sROC) curve was constructed. The area under the sROC curve was an alternative global
         measure of test performance. The pooled estimates of SEN and SPE were calculated as
         the main outcome measures. Meanwhile, the summary positive and negative likelihood
         ratios (pooled PLR and pooled NLR, respectively, defined as the ratio of the probabilities
         that the CTCs detection will be positive/negative in cases with gastric cancer versus
         those without gastric cancer) were also calculated. The value of pooled PLR higher
         than 10 indicate that the positive result of the given test is useful for the confirmation
         of presence of gastric cancer, while the value of pooled NLR lower than 0.1 indicate
         that the negative result is useful for the exclusion of the disease [27]. As a single indicator measure of the diagnostic test accuracy that comprises a combination
         of SEN and SPE [28], the diagnostic odds ratio (DOR) describes the odds of positive test results in patients
         with gastric cancer compared with the odds of positive results in those without the
         disease. It’s calculated as: DOR = PLR/NLR.
      
      The between-study heterogeneity was evaluated by Q test and I-square statistics. The
         former indicates whether the heterogeneity is significant. An inconsistency index
         of 0% and P value of 0.05 and more indicate no observed heterogeneity, when I2 becomes higher, the heterogeneity becomes greater. And I2 values ≥50% indicates substantial heterogeneity, in this circumstance, the DerSimonian
         Laird method was applied for pooled analyses [29,30].
      
      Furthermore, to explore the sources of between-study heterogeneity, a meta-regression
         was used according to the characteristics of the included studies. Subgroup analyses
         were also performed.
      
      Publication bias was studied too by a regression of diagnostic log odds ratio against
         1/sqn’t. A non-zero slope coefficient suggestive of significant small study bias (p
         value &lt; 0.10) [31].
      
   

