Methods
   
      Ethical approval for this study was provided by the Conjoint Faculties Ethic Review
         Board at the University of Calgary and all participants provided written informed
         consent.
      
      Examination of response options
      Two experienced interviewers participated in this pilot examination of response options.
         The pilot study was conducted to determine the preferred wording for telephone interviews.
         Participants (N=21) meeting the criteria for pathological gambling, as part of a telephone
         assessment, were informed by the interviewer that: “I am going to ask you some questions
         regarding how your gambling problem has affected your life in the past month”. Participants
         where then asked two questions about each of the three domains. The domains were asked
         in the standard order used previously (work, social and family), but question response
         order was randomized. For example: “To what extent has your gambling disrupted your
         work or studies in the past month? Would you say not at all, mildly, moderately, markedly,
         or very severely? To what extent has your gambling problem disrupted your work or
         studies in the past month on a scale of 0 to 10, with zero indicating not at all and
         10 indicating severely?” Participant agreement across the two response options was
         computed and the interviewers provided qualitative feedback on their preferences.
      
      Psychometric examination
      Participants
      For the trial of the distance relapse prevention program, a sample of individuals
         meeting criteria for pathological gambling (N = 169) was recruited through media announcements
         and was assessed via telephone [21]. Gambling outcomes included self-reported gambling behaviours, confirmed by collateral
         reports, and gambling problem severity. Assessments were conducted at baseline, six
         weeks, six months and twelve months by trained research assistants. Results indicated
         that extended versus brief support did not improve gambling outcomes over 12 months.
      
      Interview measures
      The initial interview included: a gambling history measure including a timeline follow-back
         interview assessing gambling behaviour [16]; two measures of gambling problem severity (the NODS, which measures DSM-IV criteria
         for the past year and lifetime [13] and the SOGS [10]), which measures past year problem severity; a measure of self-efficacy for quitting
         gambling (Gambling Abstinence Self-efficacy Scale or GASS) [22]; a measure of gambling craving over the past 24 hours [23]; a measure of current depression (Centre of Epidemiologic Studies – Depressed Mood
         Scale or CES) [24]; and the SDS-G. Based upon the pilot study, the specific questions asked were:
      
      •To what extent has your gambling problem disrupted your work or studies in the past
         month on a scale of 0 to 10, with zero indicating not at all and 10 indicating extremely?
      
      •To what extent has your gambling problem disrupted your social life in the past month
         on a scale of 0 to 10, with zero indicating not at all and 10 indicating extremely?
      
      •To what extent has your gambling problem disrupted your Family life/household responsibilities
         in the past month on a scale of 0 to 10, with zero indicating not at all and 10 indicating
         extremely?
      
      The six month follow-up interviews included: a timeline follow-back to capture gambling
         behaviour since the last assessment; the GASS; the SDS-G; and a measure of perceived
         control over gambling (0–10 point scale). The twelve month assessments included: the
         instruments used at six months plus the past-year versions of the NODS and SOGS and
         a third measure of problem severity, the PGSI; the CES; an unpublished six item past
         week gambling craving measure; and a measure of perceived social support provided
         by family and friends [25].
      
      Analyses
      Internal reliability was computed for baseline, six and twelve month data. Confirmatory
         factor analysis, using maximum likelihood structural equation modelling, was computed
         using six and twelve month data. To maximize sample size, baseline data were excluded
         and missing data (6 cases at 12 months) were estimated using full information maximum
         likelihood [26]. Model fit was assessed using the χ2/df ratio, comparative fit index (CFI) and the root mean square error of approximation
         (RMSEA). Criteria for good fit was considered to be χ2/df ratio &lt; 3.00 [27], CFI &gt; 0.95 [28] and RMSEA &lt; 0.05 [29]. Concurrent validity was assessed with Pearson correlations between SDS-G scores
         and measures of gambling behaviour, problem gambling severity and self-efficacy at
         each assessment. Sensitivity to change was assessed in two ways. Changes in SDS-G
         scores over time were examined using one-way repeated measures ANOVA. The association
         between change in SDS-G scores and change in SOGS, days of gambling and depression
         from baseline to the 12 month follow-up was examined using Pearson correlations of
         difference scores. Analyses were conducted using SPSS and AMOS V.19.
      
   

