Methods
   
      Study settings and population
      This is a longitudinal study with 6 month follow-up period. The baseline survey was
         conducted from February to April, 2009 to assess the prevalence of CMD among 465 HIV/AIDS
         patients without TB and 124 TB/HIV co-infected patients from the ART clinics of Adama,
         Nekemet and Jimma specialized hospitals in Ethiopia. The methodology and the baseline
         findings are published in a previous article [16]. In general, 465 patients without TB and 124 TB/HIV co-infected patients who were
         taking ART were recruited in the three hospitals to compare CMD among the two groups.
         The sample size was determined based on the following assumptions: 5% lower mean score
         of physical QoL life among TB/HIV co-infected patients compared to HIV patients without
         TB, 95%CI, a 1:3 ratio of HIV/TB co-infected patients versus HIV patients, and a 10%
         for non-response rate. All the TB/HIV co-infected patients were in the intensive phase
         of anti-TB treatment during the recruitment period. For each TB/HIV co-infected patients,
         3 HIV patients without active TB were selected in the TB/HIV clinics using a simple
         random sampling technique. The exclusion criteria for both groups were age less than
         15 years, the presence of an opportunistic infection or a known chronic illness like
         diabetes mellitus and hypertension.
      
      Data collection procedures and follow up
      Diagnoses of TB and HIV at baseline were based on the national guideline [20]. Smear microscopy was the major diagnostic tool for pulmonary TB. TB lymphadenitis
         was diagnosed based on clinical parameters and cytological examination obtained by
         fine needle aspiration. TB was excluded from the HIV patients by a thorough symptom
         screening.
      
      After recruitment, patients were appointed monthly to the ART clinics of the respective
         hospitals to take their medication (anti-retroviral and ant-TB drugs). During each
         visit, patients were thoroughly assessed by trained nurses for drug side effects,
         general health status and presence of symptoms of opportunistic infection including
         TB. CD4 lymphocyte count and WHO clinical staging were extracted from the patients’
         record at baseline and at the 6th month. CMD and QoL were measured at baseline and at the 6th month of follow up.
      
      Common Mental Disorder was measured using the Kessler 10 scales [21]. The Kessler-10 scales is validated in Ethiopia against psychiatrists’ diagnosis
         using the comprehensive psychopathological scale [22,23] and it contains 10 questions each containing 5-point Likert scales (1 = never, 2
         = a small part of the time, 3 = some of the time, 4 = most of the times, 5 = all of
         the time). The K-10 instrument is a useful screening tool to identify CMD such as
         depression, anxiety and somatoform disorders. It asks questions regarding the presence
         of depression, tiredness, nervousness, restlessness, hopelessness, and worthlessness
         in 30 days prior to the survey. To assess the degree of mental health status of individuals,
         CMD was categorized as normal (score &lt;20), moderate (score 20-24), and severe (score
         above 25) based on the recommendations of other authors [21,23]. Several studies have used cut off score 20 to identify cases CMD [24,25].
      
      QoL was measured through face to face interview using the short Amharic version of
         the World Health Organization Quality of Life Instrument for HIV clients (WHOQOL HIV-Bref)
         [26]. The QoL instrument is published in the previous article [16]. In brief, it consisted of 31 Likert scale questions in six domains of QoL: Physical
         health (4 items); psychological well being (5 items); social relationship (4 items);
         environmental health (8 items); level of independence (4 items) and spiritual health
         (4 items). There were two general questions about general QoL and perceived general
         health. The overall quality of life was measured using all the questions as described
         in elsewhere [26].
      
      Data analysis
      Data were analyzed using the SPSS version 16.0 and STATA® version 11 software. Items
         score of the K-10 were summed to create a continuous CMD outcome variable. Similarly,
         items scores of the WHOQOL-HIV-Bref instrument was summed to create a continuous QoL
         exposure variable. We used t-test and F-test to compare means of CMD between groups.
      
      Paired-T-tests were used to compare repeated measurements of CMD at baseline and six
         months. Multivariate analysis was conducted using generalized estimating equations
         (GEE) using the Gaussian family and the identity link function. In this model, the
         correlations between the baseline and 6-month measurements are taken into account.
         Variables with significant correlation were removed. A P-value of less or equal to
         0.05 was taken as the cut-off value for significance.
      
      Ethical considerations
      Ethical clearance was obtained from the Jimma University ethical review board. Written
         informed consent was obtained from the study participants. To ensure confidentiality,
         we used codes to analyze the data. Patients who scored above 20 on the Kessler scale
         were referred to Psychiatry units in each hospital for further diagnosis and management.
      
   

