Methods
   
      Research was carried out in the European network on Medicine and Management (FP7 COST
         action ISA0903; http://www.dr-in-mgmt.eu webcite) and includes Denmark, Germany, Greece, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal and Spain as
         country cases. As Burau [10], p. 569 highlights, more diverse comparisons have created ‘a range of challenges
         related to ensuring comparability, to comparing beyond the nation state, and to finding
         appropriate data for comparison’. Wrede [46] argues that case-based methods may help to capture complexity and, furthermore, highlights
         the benefits of interdisciplinary scholarship and methodological reflexivity. One
         example of a case study method is the so-called ‘decentred comparative research’ [47,48] that is characterised by qualitative methodology and interpretative analysis based
         on bottom-up developed categories and by high levels of sensitivity to the contexts.
         This approach seems to be useful also for the purpose of our research, because it
         minimises the constraints of research categories and theoretical bias, and therefore
         provides most opportunity for exploring emergent modes of control.
      
      The conceptual model
      The research design is a case-based comparison comprising hospital case studies from
         seven European countries, namely Denmark, Germany, Greece, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal
         and Spain. These countries were selected for two reasons: at first and foremost, they
         represent a range of different health systems and economic and geopolitical conditions
         in Europe that made it possible to analyse both general trends and specific determinants
         of new modes of control. The cases also reflect existing expertise in the group of
         authors, and are therefore suitable for context-sensitive, qualitative case-based
         comparison.
      
      The hospitals selected for inclusion here have broadly similar characteristics: they
         fall in the range of middle to large hospitals that are primarily public, have implemented
         a wide range of new managerial controls and, on average, achieved high standards of
         quality of the services provided when compared to other hospitals in the country.
         This selection of cases allows us to explore similarities and differences in the emergent
         patterns of control in relation to organisational settings without losing sight of
         national (macro-level) institutions. Figure&nbsp;1 shows the conceptual model developed for our analysis.
      
      Figure 1. The conceptual model of researching control in hospitals.
      We established an interdisciplinary research team comprising wide-ranging expertise
         from health management, economics and medicine to social and political science as
         well as from the different countries and from practice, research and policy. An interactive
         and reflective approach was applied both to the development of instruments and the
         analysis of data in comparative perspective: two workshops, each lasting a day and
         a half, and additional virtual discussion and comments from additional experts in
         the field were organised, providing the opportunity for an in-depth discussion and
         validation of indicators and findings. The major categories are summarised below and
         primarily include basic analytical categories drawn from the governance literature
         (as described previously) and in addition, an empirical category developed from our
         case study material.
      
      Governance: serves as an umbrella concept including different forms (hierarchy, market, network,
         and professional self-governance), different sets of managerial and professional modes
         of governing, and institutions and actors:
      
      ● Hierarchy: top-down exercised on levels of state and/or hospitals.
      
      ● Market: all forms of competition; privatisation; consumer/patient choice.
      
      ● Network: complex forms of governing with higher levels of negotiations and more plural stakeholders
         involved, including among others, corporatist-style governance.
      
      ● Professional self-governance: the state has delegated regulatory powers and responsibility for public sector policy-making
         to professional associations.
      
      Accountability structures: roughly described as ‘who does what, reporting to whom’.
      
      Coordination: serves as an empirical category, including coordination across the levels of the
         hospital between top-down and bottom-up governing, and between managerial-organisational
         and professional self-governing procedures.
      
      Research instruments and data collection
      A Hospital Control Assessment Framework (H-CAF) [49] was developed that served as guidance for the collection of data in our different
         countries. The H-CAF is a pioneering instrument, because no research exists that brings
         cross-country comparison to the level of the organisation. It is based on a semi-structured,
         extensive topic guide. Although the instrument is very detailed in order to assure
         comparability between countries and in an interdisciplinary group of authors, it is
         important to note that it served as a qualitative tool. Data were collected by the
         respective country experts in the group of authors using different sources of information.
         However, the assessment framework might serve as a pilot for developing a standardised
         questionnaire for surveying a larger number of hospitals in future.
      
      Drawing on the conceptual model outlined in Figure&nbsp;1, the H-CAF comprises the following five categories:
      
      1. Key characteristics of the healthcare state and institutional contexts of hospital
         governance (macro-level);
      
      2. Governance structures of the hospital (meso-level/organisation);
      3. Financial/efficiency controls and managerial tools (organisational levels, accountability
         and actors);
      
      4. Quality and safety controls and organisational-managerial tools (organisational
         levels; accountability and actors);
      
      5. Professional/medical self-governing controls and tools (organisational levels;
         accountability and actors) [49].
      
      A set of indicators was developed for each of the categories in order to specify the
         different tools of control in hospitals and how they are applied. While category 1
         focuses on the macro-level of healthcare states and category 2 on the meso-level of
         organisations more generally, the remaining three categories seek to combine actor-centred
         and organisational dimensions, asking ‘who is responsible’ and at ‘what level of the
         organisation’. In relation to existing instruments [5,50], the innovative momentum of this instrument is a comparative analysis on the organisational
         level that, firstly, pays greater attention to professional self-governance and the
         connectedness between managerialism-professionalism, and, secondly, to actor-centred
         governance and accountability structures.
      
      In every country included in our study, one hospital was selected as a case study
         following the criteria defined above. The case studies were collected between September
         and November 2011 and draw on document analysis and other secondary sources and expert
         information in accordance with ethical guidelines of the COST action and the respective
         national policies; ethics approval for expert information is not required in any of
         the countries where it has been included in this study.
      
      A bottom-up approach and interpretative methodology were used to analyse the country
         cases. The findings were discussed in an interactive workshop, as already mentioned,
         firstly in relation to a single case study and then in comparative perspective. The
         analysis followed three main steps: (1) identifying common trends across the case
         studies, (2) describing the new emergent forms of control case by case and exploring
         similar patterns, and (3) finally developing an analytical category that helps to
         draw a comparative map of control across the levels and the substance of governance.
         This complex analytical procedure helps to improve both comparability and context-sensitivity.
         While the small-scale empirical basis (one case study per country) facilitates a qualitative
         analysis, it also has a number of limitations that are explained in more detail in
         the conclusion section.
      
   

