Methods
   
      The forensic occupational therapy online discussion group was selected as a single
         case example representing a point of convergence for occupational therapists who tend
         to be quite isolated from other occupational therapists in similar practice settings.
         There were no requirements or limitations on group membership and there was no expectation
         of privacy from the general public. Therefore, the data was accessed as publicly available
         information and ethics board review was not required in accordance with article 2.2(b)
         of the Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans
         [17], which is the governing document for conducting ethical research in Canada.
      
      Statement
      A case study method was used [18] to access and analyze eight years of online postings in the forensic occupational
         therapy discussion group beginning September 1, 2003 through August 31, 2011. The
         data was ‘cleaned’ , removing spam, administrative posts, repeat and blank posts.
         The remaining posts were coded to identify the purpose of each post and the topics
         being discussed. A theoretical thematic analysis [19] was then completed to describe general trends or patterns in the purposes for which
         members posted within the online discussion. The first author and four research assistants
         used a semantic approach to generating a list of codes for the entire data set. Portions
         of the data set were coded by more than one person for inter-rater consistency in
         thoroughness and differentiation throughout the coding. The first author sorted the
         different codes, refined the identified themes, and wrote a detailed summary of each
         theme. This analysis was then reviewed and further refined by the second author. Descriptive
         quantitative data were also collected including number of posts per year, number of
         posts coded within each theme, and the country where each post originated. Country
         of origin was identified either through statements within the post indicating where
         the occupational therapist is located or from the signature line of the author of
         the post.
      
      The findings presented here provide a general understanding of the purposes for which
         the group was used as well as strengths and limitations of the current group structure
         in light of technological advances. Quotes from the data are presented in italics
         along with the date it was posted to the online discussion group.
      
   

