Methods
   
      Study samples
      GCTs from pediatric and adolescent patients (ages 0–21&nbsp;years) were obtained from the
         Cooperative Human Tissue Network (Columbus, OH) and from Children’s Medical Center
         Dallas (CMC). Tumors were resected at initial diagnosis and snap frozen at -70°C.
         Pathology reports were also provided. Data were available for tumor histology, tumor
         location (gonadal or extragonadal), sex, and age at diagnosis. Normal adjacent tissue
         was also available for five of the tumors (four ovarian and one testicular) in our
         case series. Diagnosis was verified by a pediatric pathologist prior to molecular
         analysis and only samples with &gt;70% tumor cellularity of pure histological subtypes
         were included.
      
      This analysis used existing data with no personal identifiers; therefore, the study
         was deemed exempt from review by the Institutional Review Boards of the University
         of Minnesota and the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and CMC.
      
      DNA extraction and bisulfite conversion
      Genomic DNA was isolated from GCT tissue and paired normal adjacent tissue (when available)
         using either the TRIzol® extraction method (Invitrogen Life Technologies, California) or a QIAamp DNA Mini
         Kit (Qiagen Sciences, Maryland) according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol.
         DNA yield was quantified using 1&nbsp;μl DNA on a NanoDrop™ spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific,
         Maryland). Extracted DNA was stored at -80°C until further analysis.
      
      Prior to methylation analysis, 1&nbsp;μg genomic DNA was treated with sodium bisulfite
         to convert unmethylated cytosines to uracil using the EZ DNA Methylation Kit (Zymo
         Research, Orange, CA) according to manufacturer’s protocol.
      
      GoldenGate cancer methylation panel
      DNA methylation at 1505 CpG loci in 807 cancer-related genes was evaluated using the
         GoldenGate Cancer Methylation Panel I (Illumina, Inc.) in the Biomedical Genomics
         Center at the University of Minnesota following the manufacturer’s protocol as described
         [18]. Replicates were included, including four duplicates that were included on both arrays
         and five duplicates that were included within one array.
      
      Pyrosequencing
      Array methylation results were validated by Pyrosequencing using a PyroMark MD80 Pyrosequencer
         (Qiagen) in a subset of the samples (N = 41 samples from CHTN). Five pyrosequencing
         assays were designed for regions targeting the CpG loci on the array that had significant
         methylation differences between yolk sac tumor and other histologic subtypes. Briefly,
         PCR primers and sequencing primers were designed using PSQ Assay Design software (Qiagen,
         Inc) to capture the array CpG and as many neighboring CpGs as possible. Methylation
         at imprinted loci was evaluated using assays described in Woodfine et al. [19]. Primers and conditions are available upon request. Global LINE1 methylation was
         measured by pyrosequencing 4 CpG loci in the LINE1 region as previously described
         [20]. LINE1 was measured in triplicate for each sample.
      
      Commercially available Epitect methylated and unmethylated DNA standards were used
         as controls (Qiagen). In addition, a sequencing primer control and a no template control
         were included for each assay. The level of methylation for each CpG within the target
         region of analysis was quantified using the Pyro Q-CpG Software.
      
      Preparation of total RNA
      Total RNA was prepared from fresh frozen tumor tissue. 30–50&nbsp;mg of tissue was homogenized
         using Tissue Miser (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) in TRIzol® Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA); approximately 1&nbsp;mL TRIzol® per 50&nbsp;mg of tissue was used. After incubation for 30&nbsp;minutes at room temperature,
         phase separation was done using chloroform (200&nbsp;μL/1&nbsp;mL Trizol®). Sample was shaken vigorously, centrifuged at 13000&nbsp;rpm at 4°C, and aqueous phase
         removed. RNA precipitation was done using 70% ethanol. To remove contaminant genomic
         DNA, on-column DNase digestion was done using RNase-Free DNase Digestion Kit (Qiagen,
         Valencia, CA). RNA isolation was done per manufacturer’s instructions using RNeasy® Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and final elution performed in 20 μL H2O. Quantity and purity was assessed using NanoDrop™ 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo
         Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, DE). Absorbance ratios at 260/280&nbsp;nm and 260/230&nbsp;nm
         were used to verify purity. Quality was further assessed by visualization of 28S and
         18S bands after performing gel electrophoresis (1% agarose in 1X Tris-EDTA-Acetate
         Buffer).
      
      Quantitative RT-PCR
      cDNAs were synthesized from 1 μg of purified RNA using RT2 First Strand Kit (SABiosciences, Frederick, MD). Real-time quantitative PCR gene
         expression profiling was performed using a Wnt pathway-specific array (SABiosciences,
         Frederick, MD). Arrays profiled 84 pathway-specific genes with validated primers and
         contained internal control primers to assess genomic DNA contamination, RNA quality,
         and PCR amplification efficacy. RT-qPCR was performed on Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time
         PCR System (Carlsbad, CA) using RT2 SYBR® Green qPCR Master Mix (SABiosciences, Frederick, MD) as a fluorophore for amplicon
         detection. PCR conditions were as follows: 95°C × 10&nbsp;minutes, 95°C for 15&nbsp;seconds
         then 60°C for 1&nbsp;minute × 40&nbsp;cycles, followed by a dissociation stage per manufacturer’s
         protocol. Gene expression was normalized to endogenous HPRT, β-actin (ACTB) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
         dehydrogenase (GAPDH), as these internal reference genes exhibited the least variation
         among the five internal reference genes evaluated. Fold change of gene expression
         was determined using the 2(-ΔΔCt) method, and compared yolk sac tumors (n = 4) to germinomas (n = 3). We performed
         unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis using web-based PCR data analysis software
         (http://www.sabiosciences.com/pcrarraydataanalysis.php webcite). Raw gene expression data and calculations are shown in Additional file 1: Tables S2-S8, . Gene expression among histologic subtypes was compared using a type
         3 t-test (Additional file 1: Table S7).
      
      Additional file 1: Table S1. Comparison of Methylation and gene expression. Table S2. Wnt pathway gene list. Table S3. Average Ct. Table S4. Average Delta(Ct). Table S5. 2^(-Avg.(Delta(Ct)). Table S6. Fold Change. Table S7. p-value. Table S8. Fold-Regulation. Table S9. Expression of SOX2 and DNMT3B by tumor histology.
         	Format: XLS 
         	Size: 130KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Excel Viewer
      Real time quantitative RT-PCR for SOX2 and DNMT3B (N = 34 samples) was measured using
         a human embryonic stem cell PCR array (SA Biosciences). Fold change of gene expression
         was determined using the 2(-ΔΔCt) method, and differences by tumor histology were measured using generalized linear
         models.
      
      Statistical analysis
      To understand differences in methylation patterns by tumor histology, we evaluated
         the three main histologic subtypes as determined by pathology review (YSTs, dysgerminomas,
         and teratomas) using the analytic techniques described below.
      
      GoldenGate methylation data
      Using the GoldenGate array, the methylation status of a CpG site is calculated as
         the variable β, which is the ratio of the fluorescent signal from the methylated allele
         to the sum of the fluorescent signals of both methylated and unmethylated alleles
         [18]. These values range from 0 (unmethylated) to 1 (fully methylated). GenomeStudio software
         (Illumina, Inc) was used to calculate the average methylation values (β) from the
         ~30 replicate methylation measurements for each CpG locus. We used raw average β values
         without normalization. GenomeStudio software was also used to assess data quality
         for each CpG loci. We omitted all CpG loci where ≥ 25% of the samples had a detection
         p-value &gt; 0.05 (N = 16, 1%). X-linked CpG loci (N = 84) were also removed, resulting
         in 1,405 loci for analysis.
      
      The remaining analyses for the array data were conducted in R [21]. Methylation differences were evaluated using unsupervised hierarchical clustering
         with the Manhattan metric and average linkage as previously described [22]. We used recursively partitioned mixture modeling (RPMM) to test associations between
         methylation status and tumor (histology and location) and demographic (age at diagnosis
         and sex) characteristics as described [23] and implemented [22,24]. Briefly, samples are assigned to a methylation class using a model-based form of
         unsupervised clustering. Permutation-based tests (with 10,000 permutations) were used
         to test for associations between methylation class and covariates: we used a chi-squared
         test for categorical covariates (tumor histology, tumor location, and sex), and a
         Kruskal-Wallis test statistic to test associations between methylation class and age.
      
      We then used a series of generalized linear models (GLM) to identify genes that were
         differentially methylated in YSTs and teratomas as previously described [22]. We accounted for multiple testing by controlling the false-discovery rate (FDR)
         [25]. Q-values were computed using the q-value package in R.
      
      Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; Ingenuity Systems) was used to identify pathways
         that were enriched in the list of CpG loci with significantly different methylation
         in YSTs compared with other histologic subtypes of tumors and in immature teratomas
         compared with mature teratomas. We implemented an IPA Core analysis with HUGO gene
         symbol as the identifier. For the analysis of YSTs, we restricted the analysis to
         CpG loci with up-regulated methylation (effect size &gt; 1.0). For the comparison of
         mature and immature teratomas, we restricted the analysis to CpG loci with down-regulated
         methylation in immature teratomas. Both analyses included only CpG loci that were
         significant after controlling for multiple comparisons (q-value &lt; 0.05)
      
      Pyrosequencing data
      Analysis of pyrosequencing data was conducted using SAS v. 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary,
         NC). For the array validation assays, Pearson correlation coefficients and p-values
         are reported for correlation between Pyrosequencing and GoldenGate data.
      
      For the imprinted loci, we would expect methylation to be ~50%. We categorized samples
         into three groups: 1) &lt;33% methylation (hypomethylated), 2) 33-66% methylation (median
         methylation), and 3) &gt;66% methylation (hypermethylation) as previously described [11,26]. A Fisher’s exact test was used to evaluate statistical significance of any differences
         in methylation by tumor histology and location.
      
      Global LINE1 measure was evaluated by calculating the mean methylation level across
         the 4 LINE1 CpG loci. The mean was then averaged across the three replicates for each
         sample. Differences in LINE1 methylation across tumor histology (YST, germinoma, mature
         teratoma, immature teratoma, normal adjacent), tumor location, sex and age group were
         evaluated using a GLM with LINE1 methylation as the outcome variable.
      
   

