Methods
   
      Study overview
      This was a cross-sectional study conducted between March 2010 and June 2012. The study
         protocol was approved by the University of Sydney Human Research Ethics Committee,
         Australia (09-2009/12100). All participants signed an informed consent form before
         participating in the study. Participants were compensated for their time and transportation
         expenses.
      
      Participants
      Participants were recruited from physiotherapy clinics in the Sydney metropolitan
         area, through advertising using flyers and posters in physiotherapy clinics and community
         centers and by advertising on local social media web sites. The inclusion criteria
         were: patients with non-specific low back pain (i.e. low back pain with no specific
         pathology) [22], aged between 18 and 79&nbsp;years and possessing sufficient fluency in the English language
         to answer self-completed questionnaires. Exclusion criteria were: sciatica (i.e. pain
         radiating below the knee with definite neurological signs); spinal surgery within
         the preceding 6&nbsp;months; previously diagnosed with a sleep disorder for which they
         were receiving care; receiving care for a mental health condition; and rotating night
         shift workers. There was no restriction on duration of LBP.
      
      Procedures
      Recruiting physiotherapists informed patients about the study and passed their contact
         details to the study researcher. Potential participants from the community were provided
         with information about the study through the post or email. Volunteers who showed
         an interest in participating were then contacted and screened for inclusion by the
         study researcher.
      
      All those who met the eligibility criteria were given an appointment to meet the study
         researcher at the sleep clinic of the Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, the
         University of Sydney, Australia. During their visit to the clinic, participants completed
         a baseline assessment booklet, which took approximately 30 to 45&nbsp;minutes. The baseline
         assessment booklet contained:
      
      (i) Demographic questions regarding a participant’s age, gender, weight, height, educational
         level, employment status, smoking status, and whether the participant was seeking
         care for LBP or taking medication.
      
      (ii) Self-reported measures of sleep quality, including the Pittsburgh questionnaire,
         Insomnia index, and Epworth scale.
      
      (iii) The Brief Pain Inventory, which measures pain intensity [23]; the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS-21) [24], which measures depression, anxiety and stress; the Roland and Morris Disability
         Questionnaire [13], which measures disability due to LBP; and the Fatigue Severity Scale [25], which measures fatigue.
      
      Participants also completed the Pittsburgh sleep diary [21], over 7 consecutive days. Participants were followed up, at least once, either via
         phone calls or through SMS text messages to ensure that the sleep diary was being
         completed.
      
      Measures
      The Pittsburgh sleep diary (sleep diary)
      The sleep diary [21] consists of two sections. Although both sections were completed, only the second
         section was used in this study. The section collects information about the previous
         night’s sleep and is completed immediately after awaking. It contains the following
         items: (1) time went to bed, (2) lights out time, (3) sleep onset latency (SOL) calculated
         as the minutes from lights out until falling asleep, (4) time of final waking, (5)
         method/ reason of final waking, (6) number of times the participant woke during the
         night, wake after sleep onset (WASO), (7) duration of WASO in minutes calculated as
         the total number of minutes of awake that occurred after sleep onset and before the
         final awaking, (8) reason(s) for WASO, (9) sleep quality, (10) mood on final awaking,
         and (11) alertness on final waking. Items 9 to 11 were completed on a 0–10 Numerical
         Rating Scale (NRS).
      
      The Pittsburgh sleep quality index (Pittsburgh questionnaire)
      The Pittsburgh questionnaire is a self-report instrument designed to evaluate sleep
         quality over the last month. It consists of 19 items to produce 7 aspects of sleep
         quality (sleep onset latency, sleep duration, efficiency, quality, disturbances, medication,
         and day-time dysfunction). The sum of these 7 aspects (0–3) yields a global score
         of sleep quality (0–21); a high sore is an indication of poor sleep quality. The cut-off
         score of &gt; 5 has been found to be an accurate cut-off score to distinguish between
         patients with primary insomnia and those without insomnia [18].
      
      The insomnia severity index (Insomnia index)
      The Insomnia index is a 7-item scale, with each item rated on a 5-point Likert-scale.
         It assesses insomnia severity, sleep satisfaction, sleep interference with day-time
         functioning, noticeability of sleep impairment, and distress caused by insomnia over
         the last 2&nbsp;weeks. Summation of the 7-items provides a score ranging from 0 to 28,
         where 0–7 indicates no significant insomnia, 8 to 14 indicates sub-threshold insomnia,
         15 to 21 indicates moderate insomnia, and 22 to 28 indicates severe insomnia. The
         cut-off score of &gt; 14 has been reported to be the most accurate point to detect patients
         with primary insomnia [19].
      
      The Epworth sleepiness scale (Epworth scale)
      The Epworth scale is an 8-item self-report questionnaire used to assess excessive
         day-time sleepiness over the last week. Participants indicate on a 4-point Likert-
         type scale (0 = never, 3 = high chance) the likelihood that they will “doze off or
         fall asleep” in eight different situations. Summation of the 8 responses produces
         a total score ranging from 0 to 24; with higher scores reflecting greater sleepiness.
         The cut off score of &gt; 10 has been found to accurately determine excessive day-time
         sleepiness [26].
      
      The sleep item of the Roland and Morris disability questionnaire (Roland item)
      The Roland and Morris Disability questionnaire [13] is a 24-item self-administered questionnaire designed to measure the effect of LBP
         on a patient’s normal activities of daily living. The sleep item (Roland item) examines
         sleep quality in relation to the effect of pain: “I sleep less well because of my back”. The response format of the item is dichotomous (yes/no). The item has been reported
         to be easy to understand and answer by patients with LBP [27].
      
      The four self-reported sleep questionnaires, the Pittsburgh questionnaire; Insomnia
         index; Epworth scale and the Roland item were selected for several reasons. Both the
         Pittsburgh questionnaire and the Insomnia index assess several aspects of insomnia,
         including sleep difficulty and day-time impairments related to night’s sleep, and
         have been widely used in the assessment of sleep quality in patients with LBP [28]. On the other hand, a questionnaire with a single item may potentially be easier
         to complete, less time consuming and easier to score and interpret than a measure
         with multiple insomnia items [29]. We, therefore, attempted to evaluate the discriminatory properties of the Roland
         item and the Epworth scale to detect insomnia in patients with LBP. The Roland item
         assesses sleep difficulty and is commonly employed by clinicians and researchers in
         the domain of LBP [30] and the Epworth scale is also a common measure that has been translated into 52 languages
         to assess individual’s day-time sleepiness [31].
      
      Insomnia classification
      We adopted the general criteria of the International Classification of Sleep Disorder,
         second edition (ICSD-2) to classify insomnia [1]. Participants were classified as having insomnia if they reported in the sleep diary,
         for at least 3 of the 7 nights, either (i) wake after sleep onset (WASO) &gt; 30&nbsp;minutes
         or (ii) sleep onset latency (SOL) &gt; 30&nbsp;minutes. These symptoms should be associated
         with either poor sleep quality or low mood. Poor sleep quality was defined as &lt; 5
         on a 0–10 scale where 0 = very bad sleep quality and 10 = very good sleep quality.
         Low mood was defined as &lt; 5 on final waking on 0–10 scale where 0 = very tense and
         10 = very calm. We chose the frequency of ≥ 3 nights and duration of SOL and WASO
         of &gt; 30&nbsp;minutes as these are the most commonly recommended criteria [1,3,32].
      
      Statistical Analyses
      Statistical analyses were conducted as described below using SPSS version 19 (SPSS
         Inc., Chicago, IL), MedCalc for Windows, version 12.2.1.0 (MedCalc Software, Mariakerke,
         Belgium) and Meta-DiSc data analysis software [33].
      
      Assessment of test properties
      Discriminatory properties of self-report questionnaires were tested using the sleep
         diary as the reference test and each questionnaire as the index test.
      
      1. The scores from the index tests were used to construct Receiver Operator Characteristic
         (ROC) curves using non-parametric methods [34], with the Area Under the Curve (AUC) used to examine each test’s accuracy to discriminate
         participants with insomnia from those without insomnia. The AUC ranges from 0 to 1.0
         with a value of 0.5 representing discrimination no better than chance. Using DeLong’s
         method ROC curves were compared to test for statistically significantly differences
         between AUCs [34]. AUC values were interpreted using guidelines provided by Swets (1988) [35]: (0.5 to 0.7 = low accuracy, 0.7 to 0.9 = moderate accuracy, &gt;0.9 = high accuracy).
      
      2. Index test scores were dichotomised using both the ROC technique and scores based
         on the literature: for the Pittsburgh questionnaire we used cut-off points of &gt; 5
         [18] and &gt; 10 [36], a cut-off &gt; 14 for the Insomnia index [19], and for the Epworth scale we used a cut-off point of &gt;10 [26]. A 2 x 2 table was created to calculate sensitivity, specificity, positive likelihood
         ratio and negative likelihood ratio. Sensitivity was defined as the proportion of
         people with insomnia who tested positive, while specificity was defined as the proportion
         of people without insomnia who tested negative.
      
   

