Methods
   
      Questionnaire
      The questionnaire was translated and modified to suit the Chinese system. HSOPSC (the
         original U.S. English version 2010) was developed by Agency for Healthcare Research
         and Quality (AHRQ) in 2004 [18]. The original questionnaire of 2010 version was designed to assess 12 dimensions
         of health care with 42 items of patient safety culture. But two dimensions (Frequency
         of Events Reported and Handoffs and Transitions) with 13 items were omitted due to
         being sensitive, not adequately providing a response or semantically redundant or
         ambiguous because of translation [19]. Finally, 10 dimensions containing 29 items of hospital survey on patient safety
         culture were adopted (Table&nbsp;1).
      
      Table 1. Demographic characteristic of respondents
      All items of HSOPSC questionnaire were developed based on the 5-point Likert response
         scale of agreement (“Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree”) or frequency (“Never”
         to “Always”).
      
      Two medical students translated the HSOPSC questionnaire into Chinese with a background
         in patient safety. The translation was double checked and reviewed by another two
         professors with background in patient safety, medicine and English.
      
      Sample
      This questionnaire was conducted in July to December in 2011 involving 1160 healthcare
         workers including physicians (surgical clinicians and internal clinicians) from each
         department and nurses representing different nursing units. Convenient sampling was
         used to select hospitals and participants including 32 hospitals in 15 cities across
         China. We included health care workers who are staff working in hospitals. We also
         included any kind of hospitals including specialized hospitals and traditional medicine
         hospitals.
      
      Permission to conduct the investigation was granted by the hospitals or departments.
         The participants were informed of the purpose of the survey and voluntarily completed
         a paper copy of the questionnaire anonymously by the investigators who were present.
         The participants were encouraged to ask any questions if they did not understand the
         questionnaire. Questionnaires were regarded as invalid ones if there were inconsistent
         answers (e.g., an item with more than one answer). The questionnaires were valid if
         at least 70% of items were completed.
      
      Data analysis
      Data collection
      After receiving the completed questionnaires, a preprocessing step was applied to
         remove incomplete or invalid data and based on the study by Hellings J [17]. The exclusion criteria were similar to the two studies [17,20]. They were as follows: 1) there was no entire section completed; 2) there was fewer
         than half items answered; or all the items answered the same. All data was entered
         by three researchers (Nie YL, Cui H, and SH H) independently, and then were cross-checked
         mutually by Epidata (version, 3.02). In case of doubts or disagreement in some answers,
         we looked into the original questionnaires. Negatively worded items were reversed
         to ensure that positive answers indicated a higher score. Most of the items in the
         questionnaire used the Likert 5- point response scale of agreement (Strongly disagree to Strongly agree) or frequency (Never to Always),so the lowest three scoring (1–3) answers (Strongly disagree/Disagree/Neither Agree nor Disagree or Never/Rarely/Sometimes or Failing/Poor/Acceptable), the highest two scoring (4–5) answers (Agree/Strongly agree or Most of the time/Always or Very good/Excellent) [21], as well as the highest two scoring answers were perceived as positive response answers,
         and the lowest three scoring answers were deemed other response answer. We calculated
         the positive response rate to analyze the positive attitudes towards patient safety
         culture among different populations according to the formula by Grant MJ [22].
      
      Descriptive statistics
      We analyzed the demographic characteristics of the respondents with the Excel 2003.
         The number of positive response / positive response rates of all the items were also
         summarized. Positive response rate was used to evaluate the attitudes towards patient
         safety culture on different dimensions or items.
      
      We used the Chi-Square test to analyze whether there was a statistical difference
         on health care workers in different sections, professionals and qualification levels
         towards patient safety culture. We used the Kruskal-Wallis test to infer if there
         was a statistical difference on Patient Safety Grade and Number of Events Reported in Chinese hospitals compared with that of US hospitals, with the significant level
         of P = 0.05 [21].
      
      We calculated the reliability and exploration factor analysis to evaluate the quality
         of the questionnaire. Internal consistency value (Gronbach’s α ≥ 0.70) for newly developed
         scales was recommended. Structure validity was explored using principal component
         factor analysis by Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy (KMO &gt; 0.7) and
         by Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity P &lt; 0.05.
      
      Ethic
      The study was conducted according to the principle of Helsinki Declaration. The protocol
         has been reviewed and approved by the Chinese Ethic Committee of Registering Clinical
         Trials (ChiECRCT-2011021).
      
   

