Methods
   
      Participants
      Eleven healthy adults aged 22–36 years without a history of upper limb injury or neurological
         disorder participated in the study. All participants were right hand dominant (mean
         laterality quotient, 72.5 ± 14.5) according to the 10-item version of the Edinburgh
         Handedness Inventory [29]. Prior to the experiment, all participants completed the adult safety screening questionnaire
         to determine their suitability for TMS and tDCS application [30]. All participants gave written informed consent prior to participation in the study,
         which was approved by the Deakin University Human Research Ethics Committee. All experiments
         were conducted according to the standards established by the Declaration of Helsinki.
      
      Experimental approach
      Using a randomized, cross-over design; each participant was exposed to 13 minutes
         of sham, unilateral-anodal or bilateral tDCS applied at 1.0 mA (25 cm2 electrodes, current density 0.040 mA/cm2). In all tDCS conditions, the anode was placed over the “hot spot” of the non-dominant
         extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) muscle as determined by TMS. The order of these
         conditions were counterbalanced and randomized across participants, with a one weeks
         rest between each condition. A purpose made Excel macro was used to randomize each
         experimental condition. This was a double-blinded trial as the investigator performing
         the experimental treatment and evaluation along with the participant, was not aware
         of which tDCS condition was being applied. This was achieved as the tDCS machine used,
         allowed for the use of a code to determine whether tDCS was active or inactive (sham).
         Within the sham condition, 50% of the unilateral stimulation and 50% of the bilateral
         stimulation was randomized for sham stimulation. Single and paired-pulse TMS was used
         to assess the after-effects of unilateral, bilateral or sham stimulation on corticomotor
         excitability of the right M1 and motor function of the non-dominant left ECRL. Ten
         single-pulse (130% of active motor threshold [AMT]), 10 paired-pulse (70% of AMT)
         and 10 test (test-intensity set to produce MEPs of ~1 mV) TMS stimuli were applied
         over the cortical area for the left ECRL at baseline, immediately following, 30 and
         60 minutes post tDCS, with the order of TMS stimuli (single, paired-pulse or test)
         prior to and following tDCS, randomized throughout the trials (30 trials in total
         for each time point). Motor function was measured at each of these time points in
         all conditions by having participants complete a Purdue pegboard test with their left
         hand only. Figure&nbsp;1 displays a schematic representation of the experimental protocol with measures obtained
         before and after tDCS. Importantly, all electrophysiological measures for each time
         point were measured prior to the performance of the pegboard, as post MEP facilitation
         and the effectiveness of SICI has been shown to be modulated immediately following
         the completion of the pegboard test [25].
      
      Figure 1. Schematic representation of the experimental protocol with measures obtained before,
            immediately after (0 min), 30 and 60 minutes after tDCS. Time-course measures included assessments of MMAX, active motor threshold (AMT), cortical excitability (130% AMT), short-interval intracortical
         inhibition (SICI) and motor function (pegboard).
      
      Motor function
      The Purdue pegboard was used to assess manual dexterity of the participants’ non-dominant
         left hand. The task involved picking up small pegs from a well and placing them as
         quickly as possible in a vertical array of holes using only the index finger and thumb.
         Motor function was quantified by recording the time taken to complete the left hand
         side of the peg board. Each participant was tested three times at each time point
         with the average time recorded.
      
      Transcranial direct current stimulation of primary motor cortex
      Sham, unilateral and bilateral stimulation was delivered by a battery driven constant-current
         transcranial direct current stimulator (NeuroConn, Ilmenau, Germany) via a pair of
         conductive rubber electrodes, each positioned inside a saline-soaked surface sponge
         electrode (25 cm2). During unilateral stimulation, the anode was fixed with two straps over the optimal
         cortical representation of the left ECRL muscle as identified by TMS over the right
         cortex, and the cathode (25 cm2) was placed over the left contralateral supra orbital area. During bilateral stimulation,
         the anode was placed over the cortical representation of the left ECRL and the cathode
         was placed over the cortical representation of the right ECRL. For the sham condition,
         both unilateral and bilateral (50% each) sham stimulation was applied according to
         the electrode positioning above. In order to obtain the participants perception of
         discomfort throughout the tDCS conditions, discomfort was assessed using a visual
         analogy scale (VAS), with “no discomfort” at one end of a 100-mm line and “extremely
         uncomfortable” at the other, during the first three minutes of cortical stimulation.
      
      Transcranial magnetic stimulation and electromyography
      Focal TMS was used to measure corticomotor excitability and SICI of the contralateral
         ECRL. Specifically, TMS was applied over the right M1 using a BiStim unit attached
         to two Magstim. 2002 stimulators (Magstim Co, Dyfed, UK) to produce MEPs in the non-dominant left ECRL.
         A figure-eight coil, with an external loop diameter of 9 cm, was held over the right
         M1 at the optimum scalp position to elicit MEPs in the left ECRL. The induced current
         in the brain flowed in a posterior-to-anterior direction. Sites near the estimated
         centre of the ECRL were explored to determine the optimal site at which the largest
         MEP amplitude was obtained, and this area was marked by a small ‘x’ in permanent marker.
         To ensure consistency throughout the study period and reliability of coil placement,
         the participant and researcher maintained the mark between experimental conditions.
         Care was taken by the researcher to ensure that the coil was held over the same position
         on the scalp so that the same area of the M1 was stimulated for all experimental conditions.
         All TMS measures were taken during weak voluntary contraction, by having the participant
         hold their hand in line with their wrist (neutral position). Root mean square (rms)
         electromyography (EMG) of the ECRL was obtained prior to each TMS stimulus to ensure
         that there were no changes in pre-stimulus rmsEMG which may have altered the MEP amplitude.
         AMT was determined as the minimum stimulus intensity that produced a small MEP (200
         μV in 5 out of 10 consecutive trials) during isometric contraction of the ECRL at 5
         ± 2% of maximal rmsEMG activity. A constant level of contraction was maintained with
         reference to an oscilloscope (HAMEG, Mainhausen, Germany) that displayed the rmsEMG
         signal in front of the participant. The stimulus intensity started at 50% of maximum
         stimulator output (MSO) and was altered in increments of ± 1% of MSO until the appropriate
         threshold level was achieved. All MEP amplitudes were evaluated using an in test-stimulus
         intensity of 130% AMT.
      
      Surface electromyography (sEMG) activity was recorded from the left ECRL muscle using
         bipolar Ag-AgCl electrodes. These electrodes were placed on the ECRL muscle, with
         an inter-electrode distance (centre to centre) of 2 cm with a muscle belly-tendon
         montage. A grounding strap placed around the wrist was used as a common reference
         for all electrodes. All cables were fastened with tape to prevent movement artifact.
         The area of electrode placement was shaven to remove fine hair, rubbed with an abrasive
         skin rasp to remove dead skin, and then cleaned with 70% isopropyl alcohol. The exact
         sites were marked with a permanent marker by tracing around the electrode, and this
         was maintained for the entire three week period by both the researcher and participant
         to ensure consistency of electrode placement relative to the innervation zone. An
         impedance meter was used to ensure impedance did not exceed 10 kΩ prior to testing. sEMG signals were amplified (x100-1000), band pass filtered (high
         pass at 13 Hz, low pass at 1000 Hz), digitized online at 2 kHz for 500 ms, recorded
         and analyzed using Power Lab 4/35 (AD Instruments, Bella Vista, Australia).
      
      Short-Interval Intracortical Inhibition (SICI)
      The protocol for SICI included 10 unconditioned stimuli, with a test intensity set
         to produce MEPs of ~1 mV in the ECRL and 10 conditioned stimuli, with a conditioning
         stimulus intensity set at 70% of AMT to induce SICI. Both AMT and the test stimulus
         intensity were adjusted at each time point following the removal of tDCS, if required,
         to ensure that AMT (% MSO) and the test MEP amplitudes were similar (1 mV) prior to
         and following tDCS. An inter-stimulus interval (ISI) of 3 ms between the conditioning
         and test stimulus was used [31]. Single and paired-pulse stimuli were presented according to a predetermined randomization
         protocol, with a 6–9 second time period between each stimulus.
      
      Maximal compound muscle action potential
      Direct muscle responses were obtained from the left ECRL muscle by supramaximal electrical
         stimulation (pulse width 1 ms) of the brachial plexus (Erbs point) under resting conditions
         (DS7A, Digitimer, UK). The site of stimulation that produced the largest M-wave was
         located by positioning the bipolar electrodes in the supraclavicular fossa. An increase
         in current strength was applied to the brachial plexus until there was no further
         increase observed in the amplitude of the sEMG response (MMAX). To ensure maximal responses, the current was increased an additional 20% and the
         average MMAX was obtained from five stimuli, with a period of 6–9 seconds separating each stimulus.
         MMAX was recorded at baseline and at each time point following the removal of tDCS for
         each condition, to ensure that there were no changes in peripheral muscle excitability
         that could influence MEP amplitude.
      
      Data analyses
      Pre-stimulus rmsEMG activity was determined in the ECRL 100 ms prior to each TMS stimulus
         during each condition. Any pre-stimulus rmsEMG that exceeded 5 ± 2% maximal rmsEMG
         were discarded and the trial repeated. The peak-to-peak amplitude of MEPs evoked as
         a result of stimulation was measured in the ECRL muscle contralateral to the cortex
         being stimulated in the period 10–50 ms after stimulation. MEP amplitudes were analyzed
         using LabChart 7.3.6 software (ADInstruments, Bella Vista, NSW, Australia) after each
         stimulus was automatically flagged with a cursor, providing peak-to-peak values in
         mV and were then normalized to MMAX. Average MEP amplitudes were obtained for each trial for single, paired-pulse and
         test TMS for each stimulation block (30 trials for each time point) separately. SICI
         was quantified by dividing the average paired-pulse MEP by the average single-pulse
         MEP (test-intensity set to produce MEPs of 1 mV) and multiplying by 100.
      
      Statistical analysis
      A split-plot in time, repeated measures ANOVA was used to compare the effect of each
         tDCS condition (sham, unilateral and bilateral) on corticomotor plasticity and motor
         function. When appropriate, univariate and post-hoc (LSD) analyses for pair wise comparisons
         of means for each dependent measure were used when significant interactions were found.
         Pearson’s correlations (r) were calculated to assess the association between M1 plasticity
         and motor performance. For all tests, the Huynh-Feldt correction was applied if the
         assumption of sphericity was violated. Alpha was set at P ≤ 0.05, and all results
         are displayed as means ± SEM.
      
   

