Methods
   
      Strain collection
      Since 1998, all clinical strains isolated in France are sent to the National Reference
         Centre for Legionella (NRC-L) for characterization and molecular analysis. For this study, a sample of
         114 L. pneumophila serogroup 1 clinical strains isolated from hospitalized patients with community-acquired
         LD in metropolitan France was selected during the period 2006–2009. Clinical isolates
         from nosocomial LD patients and from LD patients who had traveled ≥ 5&nbsp;days abroad
         during their incubation period, were excluded.
      
      Environmental isolates are also sent to NRC-L for identification during routine environmental
         control or for typing by using Sequence-Based Typing method, PFGE method and monoclonal
         antibody sub-grouping, allowing the identification of source of contamination. For
         this study, a random sample of 105 environmental L. pneumophila strains isolated from the period 2003–2008 was selected, including 91 L. pneumophila sg 1 and 14 L. pneumophila non-serogroup 1 isolates. These strains were collected throughout France from hot
         water system, cooling towers, sludge, fountains and thermal waters. The origin of
         the environmental strains allowed classifying the isolates in 5 groups: (a) related
         to an outbreak (5 strains); (b) found in a source related to a LD patient and matched
         with the patient isolate (on SBT and PFGE level) (1 strain); (c) found in a source
         related to a LD patient, but not matched with the patient isolate (20 strains); (d)
         not related to LD patients (76 strains); (e) endemic strains sharing a previously
         observed genotype and responsible for at least 30 epidemiologically unrelated cases
         of legionellosis (3 strains).
      
      Microarray development
      The mixed-genome microarray used in this study has been described elsewhere, and was
         developed using a systematic collection of Dutch Legionella strains [19]. In short, four clinical Legionella isolates and four environmental L. pneumophila strains were selected based on their diversity to provide a shotgun library. The
         library, consisting of 3360 genomic fragments was used to compare the labeled genomic
         DNA of 257 Legionella strains in the Dutch collection. The data for all spots were calculated as ratios
         between the tester strain and the library strains. Since 80% of the 3360 markers were
         present in all strains, encompassing the core genome, these were ignored for analysis.
         The remaining 20% showed considerable variation among strains. Also, where multiple
         markers showed nearly identical patterns over the complete data set (suggesting partial
         overlap or close linkage in the genome), only one was used for further analysis. As
         a result, 480 potentially relevant markers were used to develop the prediction model.
      
      For the French collection the Dutch library was used to compare the labelled genomic
         DNA of 219 French strains. (Additional file 2).
      
      Additional file 2. Hybridization ratios for 480 markers of the 219 French Legionella pneumophila strains.
         	Format: TXT 
         	Size: 278KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Prediction of the origin of French Legionella strains using Dutch markers
      
      The method to identify genetic markers that predict the clinical or environmental
         origin of Legionella strains from a Dutch strain collection has been described elsewhere [8]. The method is based on a classification algorithm that uses an ensemble of different
         classification trees, called Random Forest. The Random Forest statistical approach
         performs excellent in infectious disease data classification problems [20,21]. In short, the Random Forest algorithm was applied on ten random training datasets
         to select 25 markers with the highest rank of “importance” in the prediction of the
         origin of the strains (clinical or environmental). From 250 markers (25 markers times
         10 training datasets) the 25 most frequent genetic markers were chosen. An eleventh
         so called “training dataset” was constructed consisting of a random selection of clinical
         isolates and environmental Legionella strains. Using forward logistic regression, a model was developed for the “training
         dataset” with the 25 genetic markers entered as independent variables, and the origin
         of the strains (clinical or environmental) as dependent variable. The model was tested
         with a so-called ‘test dataset’ consisting of those strains that were not present
         in the eleventh training dataset, in order to prevent overfitting of the model. As
         a result, four Dutch markers were identified, that could predict the clinical or environmental
         origin of Legionella strains.
      
      In our study, we examined whether the four Dutch markers, using the same logistic
         regression model, could predict the clinical or environmental origin of the French
         strains.
      
      Marker selection for L. pneumophila strains from France
      
      Additionally, we developed a new prediction model for the French strain collection,
         using the same “Dutch” methodology [8]. The 219 French L. pneumophila strains were randomly assigned to 10 different training datasets, each consisting
         of 57 clinical and 53 environmental strains. For all training datasets, the 25 best
         predicting genetic markers were selected with the aid of the Random Forest algorithm.
         From these 250 markers, the 25 most common markers were chosen and entered in the
         logistic regression model that was developed for the eleventh constructed training
         dataset. This model was tested with the eleventh so-called ‘test dataset’, consisting
         of the 57 clinical and 52 environmental strains that were not used for the construction
         of the prediction model. The performance of the prediction model is presented in 2×2
         tables, together with the estimated sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive
         value (NPV), and positive predictive value (PPV). The NPV is the most relevant test
         characteristic in public health situations in which our prediction would be useful
         [14,15].
      
      Comparison of the Dutch and French markers
      The association between the four Dutch markers that were previously identified [8], and the predictive markers that were selected for the new prediction model based
         on the French strain collection was investigated by calculating the correlation between
         the hybridization ratios of the 4 Dutch and the 4 French predictive markers, using
         Spearman correlation coefficients. Additionally, the hybridization ratios of both
         the Dutch and the French markers were compared between clinical isolates and environmental
         strains. This was done by calculating the difference in hybridization ratio between
         clinical isolates and environmental strains, divided by the within group standard
         deviation (SD) of the ratio in the total sample. All analyses were performed using
         PASW Statistics 18.0, SPSS inc., Chicago, Illinois).
      
      Functionality of markers
      The sequences of the markers that were selected in the final prediction model that
         was developed for the French strain collection were compared with the known Legionella sequences of eleven completely sequenced strains present in the NCBI database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov webcite): Legionella longbeachae (strains NSW150 and D-4968), L. pneumophila strains Paris, Philadelphia, Lens, Corby, Alcoy, 130b, Lorraine, HL 0604 1035, and
         ATCC 43290 using BlastN and BlastX.
      
   

