Methods
   
      E. coli isolates
      
      163 isolates were randomly selected from the collection of ESBL-producing E. coli isolates maintained at -80°C in the Microbiology laboratory of Habib Bourguiba hospital.
         The 163 isolates were collected from the two university hospital of Sfax in Tunisia
         during the following years: 1989-1990 (6), 2000 (9), 2001 (18), 2002 (9), 2003 (30),
         2004 (26), 2006 (36) and 2009 (29). These isolates were obtained mainly from urine
         (124), but also from blood (20), wound swabs (10), abdominal fluid (5) and sputum
         (4).
      
      Antibiotic susceptibility testing
      The susceptibility to 16 antimicrobial agents (amoxicillin, amoxicillin + clavulanic
         acid, ticarcillin, ticarcillin + clavulanic acid, cefalothin, cefoxitin, ceftazidime,
         cefotaxime, cefepime, gentamicin, amikacin, nalidixic acid, norfloxacin, sulfamethoxzole/trimethoprim
         and tetracycline) was determined by the disk diffusion method according to the guidelines
         of the CLSI [16]. All isolates were confirmed for ESBL production using the double disk synergy method.
      
      Identification of bla genes
      
      The resistance genes blaTEM, blaSHV and blaCTX-M responsible for the ESBL activity were identified by PCR-sequencing [17]. PCR products were sequenced on ABI Prism 3100 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems,
         Foster City, CA) and were analyzed using NCBI BLAST program. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ webcite).
      
      Strain typing
      The phylogenetic group of the ESBL-producing E. coli was determined by a multiplex PCR assay [18]. Isolates belonging to phylogenetic group B2 were screened with a previously established
         PCR-based method to identify the O25b subtype [19]. Furthermore, multilocus sequence typing (MLST) using the scheme of the Institut
         Pasteur, Paris, France (http://www.pasteur.fr/mlst webcite) was used to confirm that CTX-M-15-producing E. coli O25b belonged to the international clone ST131 [19]. Genetic relatedness of the ESBL-producing strains was studied by PFGE following
         extraction of genomic DNA and digestion with XbaI PFGE according to a standard protocol using a GenePath system (Bio-Rad). PFGE banding
         profiles were compared digitally using Fingerprint II software (Bio-Rad) and relatedness
         was calculated using the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean (UPGMA)
         algorithm with similarity of bands using the Dice similarity indices. Isolates were
         considered to belong to the same PFGE cluster if their Dice similarity index was &gt;80%
         [20].
      
      Transfer of ESBL resistance determinants and plasmid analysis
      Transfer of ESBL encoding genes by conjugation was performed by matting-out assays
         using E. coli J53-2 RifR or E. coli HB101 StrR as recipient strains. Transconjugants were selected on MH agar containing rifampin
         (250&nbsp;μg/mL) or streptomycin (50&nbsp;μg/mL) plus ceftazidime or cefotaxime (2&nbsp;μg/ml). When
         plasmids were not transferable by conjugation, a transformation experiment was assayed.
         Plasmid DNA obtained using the QIAprep Spin Miniprep kit (Qiagen) were electroporated
         into E. coli DH10B (Invitrogen). Transformants were selected on MH agar plates supplemented with
         ceftazidime (2&nbsp;μg/mL) or cefotaxime (2&nbsp;μg/mL). Plasmids were classified according
         to their incompatibility group using the PCR replicon-typing scheme described previously
         [21].
      
      Detection of virulence factors and plasmid addiction systems
      For the ESBL-producing isolates, 17 virulence-associated genes were sought as previously
         described: fimH (type 1 fimbriae), papG (P fimbriae adhesion) alleles I, II and III, papC, sfa/focDE (S and F1C fimbriae), afa/draBC (Dr-binding adhesions), iha (adhesion siderophore), hra (heat(resistant agglutinin), iutA (aerobactin receptor), fyuA (yersiniabcatin receptor), cnf-1 (cytotoxic necrotizing factor type 1), hlyA (α-hemolysin), sat (secreted autoreceptor toxin), kpsMT II (group II capsule), traT (serum resistance-associated) and pheR (phenylalanine tRNA, site of insertion from PAI V) [22].
      
      For E. coli recipient strains, seven plasmid addiction system PemK–PemI (plasmid emergency maintenance),
         CcdA–CcdB (coupled cell division locus) RelB–RelE (relaxed control of stable RNA synthesis),
         ParD–ParE (DNA replication), VagC-VagD (virulence-associated protein), Hok–Sok (host-killing)
         and PndA–PndC (promotion of nucleic acid) were sought by PCR as described previously
         [7].
      
      Statistical analysis
      Comparisons were determined using Pearson’s x2 or Fisher’s exact test when appropriate, and a P value &lt; 0.05 was considered significant. Statistical analysis was carried out using
         SPSS version 11.5 for Windows.
      
   

