Methods
   
      Evaluation of the anti-lymphangiogenic effects of rapamycin in a regional metastasis
         model
      
      All animal studies were carried out according to the protocol approved by the Louisiana
         State University Health Sciences Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee,
         in compliance with the Committee guidelines. Severe combined immunodeficient (SCID)
         male mice, 4 to 6 weeks of age (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, Massachusetts),
         were housed in a barrier facility and maintained on a normal diet ad libitum.
      
      2 × 105 OSC-19 cells, a highly invasive and metastasis-prone oral squamous carcinoma cell
         line, were injected into the basolateral region of the tongues of SCID mice. The mice
         were randomized into two groups (28 control mice and 25 rapamycin-treated mice ).
         5 days after cell injections mice were given daily IP injections of vehicle (4% DMSO,
         5.2% Tween 80, and 5.2% polyethylene glycol 400) or rapamycin at a dose of 5 mg/kg.
         21 days after injection of OSC-19 cells mice were sacrificed. Lingual tissue and cervical
         lymph node samples were harvested. Mouse tongues were bisected and consecutive samples
         of lingual tissue and cervical lymph nodes were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin
         for 24 hours, processed and embedded in paraffin. Lingual tissue sections were stained
         with hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) and cross-sectional area of xenograft tumors was
         measured using Image-J software (NIH; Windows version). Cervical lymph node samples
         were examined microscopically by a pathologist using H&amp;E and cytokeratin staining
         to determine the cervical lymph node metastasis incidence. The number of tumor-free
         lymphatic vessels and those invaded by tumor cells in mouse tongues was assessed by
         our pathologist using LYVE-1 (a lymphatic-specific biomarker) immunohistochemical
         staining (R&amp;D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Lymphatic vessels invaded by tumor cells
         were defined as those with the presence of tumor cells in the endothelium-lined space
         (i.e lymphovascular invasion). Blood microvascular density was assessed after immunohistochemical
         staining with CD31 (PECAM-1; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). Individual
         microvessels were counted using a × 400 field (× 40 objective lens and × 10 ocular
         lens). At least three random fields within the tumor area were viewed and counted
         at × 400 magnification. Results were expressed as the average number of microvessels
         per field. Unpaired t test with Welch correction was used to evaluate the differences
         between treatment groups.
      
      Cell Lines
      HMEC-1A cells are a human lymphatic endothelial cell line that was subcloned [21] from HMEC-1 cells – an immortalized cell culture, which is a combination of lymphatic
         and blood vascular endothelial cells [22]. HMEC-1A cells were maintained in MCDB 131 medium (Sigma-Aldrich), supplemented with
         20mM HEPES, 1 ug/ml hydrocortisone, 10 ng/ml EGF and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).
      
      SV-LEC cells, a stable mouse lymphatic endothelial cell line, was isolated from mesenteric
         adventitial tissue and shown to express specific lymphatic markers Prox-1, LYVE-1
         and VEGFR-3 [23]. SV-LEC cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% FBS.
      
      HNSCC cell line SCC40 (tongue cancer) was kindly provided by Dr. Susanne Gollin and
         PCI-15a (pyriform sinus cancer) was provided by Dr. Theresa L. Whiteside (both from
         the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health). FaDu cells, established
         from hypopharyngeal SCC, were procured from ATCC. SCC40, PCI-15a and FaDu cultures
         were maintained in MEM media supplemented with 10% FBS and non-essential amino acids.
         2 × 105 OSC-19 cells, a gift from Dr. Eben L. Rosenthal (University of Alabama at Birmingham),
         were cultured in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% FBS.
      
      Cell Proliferation Assay
      The effects of rapamycin (LC Laboratories, Woburn, MA) on proliferation of SV-LEC
         or HMEC-1A cells were determined by plating exponentially growing cells in 96-well
         plates (2,000 per well) with 200 μl of medium. The cells were incubated at 37°C for
         3.5 hours for adherence and then treated with vehicle (DMSO) or various concentrations
         of rapamycin (1-1000 ng/ml) for time points ranging from 0 to 72 h. Cell proliferation
         was measured using a modified MTT (3-(4-5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium
         salt/phenazine methosulfate) system according to the manufacturer's instructions (CellTiter
         96 AQueous cell proliferation assay; Promega Corp., Madison, WI).
      
      Detection of apoptosis in lymphatic endothelial cells by DAPI staining
      SV-LEC (10,000 cells) or HMEC-1A (20,000 cells) were seeded on 12 mm circular glass
         cover slips in 24-well plates and allowed to attach for 4 h. Cells were then treated
         with 100 ng/ml of rapamycin or vehicle control (DMSO) for 72 h, washed with phosphate-buffered
         saline (PBS) and fixed in cold 2% paraformaldehyde for 15 min. Cells were then washed
         with PBS, fixed with cold 70% ethanol at -20°C for 1 h and stained with 1 mg/ml DAPI
         for 30 min in the dark. The coverslips were washed 2× with PBS, and mounted using
         DAKO fluorescent mounting fluid onto microscope slides. Cells were viewed and counted
         using a fluorescent Olympus Bx50 microscope using a 40× objective. The number of total
         and apoptotic cells were counted at least in four fields of each slide.
      
      Western Blot Analysis
      Soluble proteins were extracted as previously described [24]. 30 ug of protein was loaded per well and the expression of tumor and lymphatic biomarkers
         evaluated by western blotting using the following antibodies: 4EBP1 (1:300 dilution),
         phospho-4EBP1 (serine 37/46; 1:300 dilution), total and phospho-S6 ribosomal protein
         (serine 235/236, 1:100), actin (1:3,000; – all above - Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA).
         VEGFR-3/Flt-4 antibody was used at a 1:100 dilution (R&amp;D Systems, Minneapolis, MN).
         The expression levels of each marker were quantified after normalizing to actin scan
         density by immunoblotting.
      
      Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 ELISA assay
      The effects of rapamycin treatment on serum levels of soluble VEGFR-2 in mouse serum
         samples were determined using a mouse VEGFR-2 ELISA kit (R&amp;D Systems, Minneapolis,
         MN) according to manufacturer's instructions.
      
   

