Methods
   
      Study design
      With the permission of the Office for National Statistics to access and use ONSLS
         data, we conducted a cohort study, with a 10 year follow-up period. The ONSLS is a
         representative 1% sample of individuals in England and Wales, initiated at the time
         of the 1971 Population Census [17]. Study members were children born on one of four selected dates of birth in 1971
         or subsequent census years. Individuals were tracked through subsequent censuses (1981,
         1991 and 2001) and their data linked. The ONSLS has a large sample of children and
         thus has sufficient power to account for the potential confounding of the relationship
         between socio-economic disadvantage and disabling chronic conditions. In addition
         to data on cohort members, the ONSLS also contains data on individuals (non-members)
         identified at each census as living in the same households as cohort members. Thus
         data on the socio-economic circumstances of the households within which the study
         children live are available. Data files were created, containing only the 1991 and
         2001 census data fields relevant to our study, on children born between 1981 and 1991
         who became ONSLS members and who have been tracked in the 1991 and 2001 censuses.
      
      Index and comparison groups
      Children with disabling chronic conditions were identified from a question asked in
         the 1991 and 2001 Population Census of the household reference person. Children for
         whom the household reference person responded positively to the following question
         were classified as having a disabling chronic condition:
      
      ‘Do you have any long-term illness, health problem, or handicap which limits your
         daily activities or the work you can do?’
      
      In this cohort study, all children with no disability at 1991 census were included,
         and these were classified on the basis of their 2001 data. The index group of interest
         was all ONSLS child members born between 1981 and 1991 reported to have a disabling
         chronic condition in 2001 but not in 1991. The comparison group comprised ONSLS child
         members born between 1981 and 1991, who were reported as not having a disabling chronic
         condition in either 1991 or 2001. Data were extracted on both the index and comparison
         groups.
      
      Independent variables of interest
      The independent variables of interest, extracted from the 1991 member and non-member
         data files, were as follows:
      
      Highest household social class: data were extracted from the non-members’ data file
         collapsed into 6 categories: I - Professional; II- Managerial &amp; Technical; IIINM -
         Skilled non-manual; IIIM – Skilled manual; IV - Partly skilled; V– Unskilled. Armed
         Forces households and inadequately described social class were treated as missing
         data.
      
      Housing tenure: data extracted from the members’ data file collapsed into 2 categories:
         Owner-occupied and Rented/other accommodation. Those in communal establishments were
         treated as missing data as no data were available on social class of household members.
      
      Car/van ownership: data extracted from the members’ data file in 4 categories: no
         car/van; one car/van; two cars/vans; three or more cars/vans).
      
      As no standardised deprivation score was available in the dataset, these three variables
         were used to construct a household socio-economic disadvantage aggregate index (SDI)
         that combined the available individual measures of socio-economic exposures into a
         continuous measure and allowed the gradation of onset by socio-economic disadvantage
         to be examined. Each of the available variables was dichotomised (housing tenure:
         owner occupied v rented/other; social class of household: high (1–4) v low (5–6);
         Car/van ownership: 1 or more cars/vans v 0 cars/vans) and summed to generate a socio-economic
         disadvantage aggregate index. Each variable was scored as follows: 0 indicates no
         disadvantage, score of 1 indicates disadvantage. Scores were summed across variables
         to give an aggregate score of 0–3, where 0 = not disadvantaged on any and 3 = disadvantaged
         on all 3 factors.
      
      Confounding variables
      A number of factors such as age, sex, ethnicity and family status have been shown
         in other studies to be associated with childhood disability and can confound the relationship
         between childhood disability and socio-economic disadvantage. For this study, available
         potential confounding variables were: child’s age (in years in 1991 extracted from
         the members’ data file); child’s sex (extracted from the members’ data file); child’s
         ethnicity extracted from the members’ data file and collapsed into 5 categories: White
         UK/European; Black British/Caribbean/African; Indian; Pakistani and Bangladeshi; Other);
         family status (in 1991 extracted from the members’ data file and collapsed into 2
         categories: lone parent with children; married/co-habiting pair with children, with
         all other categories treated as missing data).
      
      Data analysis
      Missing data
      Children with missing data were omitted from the analysis. Cross tabulations were
         run to establish any differences between children with complete data and those with
         missing data using the Pearson Chi-square test.
      
      Main analyses
      In order to examine the associations between individual, family and socio-economic
         factors and disabling chronic conditions, the Pearson Chi-square test and Chi-square
         for linear trend were used. At the multivariable level, we explored the associations
         between socio-economic disadvantage in early childhood and developing disabling chronic
         conditions up to 10 years later using multiple logistic regression modelling, introducing
         sequentially potential confounders of the association (age, sex, ethnicity and family
         status). Logistic regression models were fitted on the index and comparison groups
         to produce odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals. First, the SDI variable alone
         was entered. Second, the SDI was entered with age and sex. Third, ethnicity (white
         vs. all other) was added along with age and sex. At the final stage, family status
         was added together with age, sex and ethnicity. Only those children with complete
         data for all variables were included in the regression models. Statistical significance
         was set at the 5% level (P ≤0.05). All analyses were carried out in SPSS V16 and undertaken
         on secure computers at the ONS Virtual Microdata Laboratory, London.
      
   

