Methods
   
      Patients
      256 patients with primary and locally advanced OSCC were enrolled in a prospective,
         randomized, phase 3 trial at Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
         School of Medicine [9], which was in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration. The aim of this study was
         to test the hypothesis that TPF induction chemotherapy administered prior to surgery
         and post-operative radiotherapy improves survival in patients with resectable locally
         advanced OSCC (trial registration ID: NCT01542931). After eligibility was confirmed
         and written informed consent obtained, patients were randomized to the control group
         (surgery followed by post-operative radiotherapy) or experimental group (TPF induction
         chemotherapy followed by surgery and post-operative radiotherapy).
      
      The TPF induction chemotherapy consisted of docetaxel 75 mg/m2 intravenously and cisplatin 75 mg/m2 intravenously on day 1, followed by 5-fluorouracil 750 mg/m2/day as a 120-hour continuous intravenous infusion on days 1 through 5. Induction
         chemotherapy was given every 3 weeks for 2 cycles. Surgery was performed at least
         2 weeks after completion of induction chemotherapy, consisting of radical resection
         of the primary lesion and full neck dissection with appropriate reconstruction (pedicle
         or free flap); frozen sections during surgery was performed to confirm adequate margins.
         Post-operative radiotherapy was initiated 4–6 weeks after surgery, at a dose of 1.8-2
         Gy/day, 5 days/week for 6 weeks, totally 54-60 Gy; in patients with high risk features,
         such as positive surgical margins, extracapsular nodal spread, or vascular embolism,
         a total radiation dose of 66 Gy was recommended.
      
      Clinical tumor response to induction chemotherapy was determined by clinical evaluation
         and imaging studies (performed at baseline and 2 weeks after cycle 2 of induction
         chemotherapy). Responses were characterized according to the RECIST version 1.0 [29]. Pathologic response to TPF induction chemotherapy was assessed by examination of
         the resected specimen. A favorable response was defined as absence of tumor cells
         or presence of scattered foci of a few tumor cells (minimal residual disease with
         &lt;10% viable tumor cells), as previously described by Licitra et al. [30]; an unfavorable pathologic response was defined as the presence of ≥10% viable tumor
         cells in the resected specimen.
      
      After treatment, patients were monitored every three months in the first two years,
         every six months in the subsequent 3–5 years, and once a year thereafter until death
         or data censoring.
      
      Detection of Annexin A1 expression using immunohistochemistry
      Pre-treatment formalin fixed and paraffin embedded biopsy specimens were used for
         detection of Annexin A1 expression; however, in the control group, if pre-treatment
         biopsy was unavailable, resected surgical specimens were used. Sections of 4 μm thick were studied using hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining and immunohistochemical
         staining for Annexin A1. The HE sections were reviewed according to the WHO histological
         criteria [31]. Immunohistochemical staining was accomplished using well established methods as
         previously described [32,33]. In brief, after deparaffinization, endogenous peroxidase block and heat-induced
         epitope retrieval, primary rabbit polyclonal antibody to Annexin A1 (product code
         of BA0640, Boster Biotech Co., Wuhan, China) at 1:150 dilution was added overnight
         at 4°C, then visualized using 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB) detection kit (Dako Cytomation,
         Denmark). The 1:150 dilution was the best dilution compared to 1:50, 1:100, and 1:200.
         Negative control was prepared using PBS instead of antibody. Microscopic examination
         was performed by two pathologists and all specimens were blinded. Positive staining
         for Annexin A1 expression was observed in the cellular membrane and cytoplasm. The
         Annexin A1 expression index was determined based on the proportion of stained cells
         on a scale of negative to strong as follows: negative, absence of stained cells; weak
         positive, &lt;50% of stained cells; and strong positive, ≥50% of stained cells. Low Annexin
         A1 expression was defined as negative and weak positive Annexin A1 expression, high
         Annexin A1 expression was defined as strong positive Annexin A1 expression. This was
         based on previous studies demonstrating that the chosen cut-off of 50% was reasonable
         for prognostic analysis [24].
      
      Statistical analysis
      The primary endpoint of this trial was survival rate. Second endpoints of this trial
         were local control and safety. Overall survival (OS) was calculated from the date
         of randomization to the date of death; disease-free survival (DFS)/locoregional recurrence-free
         survival (LRFS)/distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS) were calculated, respectively,
         from the date of randomization to recurrence/locoregional recurrence/distant metastasis
         or death from any cause.
      
      For descriptive analysis, categorical data were expressed as number and percentage.
         Chi-square test was applied to compare the difference between the baseline factors
         and Annexin A1 expression. The survival analysis was conducted using the Kaplan-Meier
         method and log-rank test. Hazard ratios (HR) were calculated using the Cox proportional
         hazards model. Intention-to-treat principle was applied for efficacy analysis.
      
      All hypothesis-generating tests were two-sided at a significance level of 0.05. Data
         were analyzed with the statistical software SPSS13.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., USA).
      
   

