Methods
   
      Setting
      This is a cross-sectional study of patients registered with the primary health care
         clinic at Salak in Sepang, Selangor, Malaysia. This clinic is run by a family medicine
         specialist and 10 medical officers.
      
      Inclusion criteria
      All registered diabetics more than age 18 and above and a minimum follow-up of three
         months at Klinik Kesihatan Salak, Sepang, were eligible for the study. The sample
         size was calculated by using Epi Info 6.0, based on the prevalence in local studies,
         which ranged from 50–56 percent [15,16]. The estimated sample size was 185 with 90 percent power, 95 percent confidence interval
         (CI), and statistical significant level (α) at 5 percent. The total number of respondents
         needed was 240, after taking into account a non-respondent rate of 30 percent. Patients
         were selected using a random sampling method. The estimated number of diabetic patients
         that visit the clinic per day and in three weeks’ time were 32 patients and 480 patients.
         Since the number of required test subjects was 240, the sampling interval of two was
         used as the constant difference between subjects. The first starting number of 2 was
         picked randomly from the registration counter.
      
      Data collection
      A face-to-face interview was conducted using a structured questionnaire. A written
         informed consent for participation in the study was obtained from participants. The
         questionnaire was designed to capture patients’ socio-demographic data, co-morbidities,
         types of CAM used, resources consulted, and the total expenditure on CAM. The attitudes,
         beliefs, and perceptions towards CAM were explored. Documented most-recent results
         of glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C) and blood pressure (BP) tests from the preceding
         year were captured from the patients’ medical records. A pilot study involving 42
         patients was done to pretest the questionnaire and estimate the likely response rate.
         The main survey was administered during the first three weeks of May 2011 by three
         medical students.
      
      Practical definition
      A DM patient was defined as someone who was clinically diagnosed with diabetes or
         was taking diabetic medications. Patients with hypertension were those whose BP ≥
         140/90 mmHg or were on antihypertensive agents.
      
      CAM use in this study is defined as consumption in one of the five categories therapy:
         biological-based therapies like herbal and dietary supplement; alternative medical
         systems, like acupuncture or Ayurveda; energy therapies like Reiki; manipulative and
         body-based systems like chiropractic or massage; and mind-body interventions like
         tai chi or yoga [3].
      
      Data analysis
      Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) v. 19.0 was used to analyze the data
         collected from the study. The findings were described in terms of frequencies, percentages,
         means, and standard deviations. The association between socio-demographic factors
         (gender, age, race, religion, educational, occupation, family household income, and
         duration and control of diabetes) and the CAM usage was determined by using Chi-square
         test. Multivariate logistic regressions were used to identify predictors of CAM usage.
      
      Ethical approval
      Ethical approval was obtained from the Ethics Committee of National Malaysia Research
         Registry (NMRR-12-430-11052).
      
   

