Methods
   
      Study setting
      The study will be run at the Connecticut Mental Health Center (CMHC) and its affiliated
         satellite clinics throughout the greater New Haven area. The expected duration of
         the study is 5 years. The study has been approved by The Yale University School of
         Medicine Human Investigation Committee (HIC#1207010507), and registered at ClinicalTrials.gov
         (NCT01866098). The study will be conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
         and the International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) - Good Clinical Practice (GCP)
         guidelines for clinical trials.
      
      Study population
      One hundred and forty four patients with SMI will be recruited from the CMHC and its
         affiliated satellite clinics throughout the greater New Haven area. All participants
         will be carefully assessed by physical examinations and laboratory findings. Any medical
         problem that needs immediate attention will be referred to each participant’s own
         primary care physician. All potential subjects will meet with study staff for intake
         and evaluation sessions to determine eligibility prior to enrollment. Eligibility
         will be determined through participant report, chart review, and communication with
         their CMHC clinician/psychiatrist, and this will be completed by the Principal Investigator
         (PI) and research coordinator.
      
      Recruitment process
      Subjects will be recruited through on-site flyers and clinician referrals. The study
         will also be announced to all the psychiatrists who are attending physicians at the
         sites, as well as the administrative heads of each clinic through team meetings and
         email lists. Subjects will be prescreened for eligibility.
      
      Retention strategy
      Based on our experience with this population, and the existing literature, we will
         implement strategies to minimize attrition. These strategies are: 1) Provider relationship:
         The clinicians who work in the treatment sites will be thoroughly informed about the
         study methodology, as well as the study's risks and benefits. The bulk of recruitment
         will be from the CMHC, where the PI has administrative responsibilities, and has direct
         access to clinicians, as well as patients. 2) Information: During the consent process,
         patients will be informed in detail about the risks, benefits, duration, and requirements
         of the study, as well as the importance of completing follow-ups. Subjects will also
         be fully informed about the possibility of being assigned to the placebo control group.
         3) Flexible scheduling: Assessment appointments will be made around subjects’ schedules,
         including before or after hours, or right before/after clinical appointments at the
         same site. Calibrated portable scales will be used for off-site appointments. 4) Transportation:
         If transportation is not available, bus tokens, bus passes, and city transportation
         for disabled subjects, when necessary, will be provided. Regular shuttles between
         sites will be accessible to subjects for appointments. 5) Missed appointments: Participants
         will receive early reminders both through study staff and from their clinicians. We
         will discuss missed appointments with the participants, provide alternatives, and
         express our appreciation of their efforts at every step. 6) Monetary reinforcement:
         We are going to utilize an incrementally increasing monetary compensation as the participant
         moves through the study. Every milestone assessment payment will be more than the
         previous one. Immediate cash payments will be disbursed instead of checks. 7) Lost
         to follow-up: In case of difficulty contacting subjects, we will utilize clinicians’
         help and schedule clinical appointment times based on prior permission from subjects
         during consent. Assessments in these cases can be done right before or after the clinical
         appointment instead of scheduling future appointments. If time or other considerations
         prevent the subject from completing the entire assessment, we will prioritize obtaining
         subjects’ weight, which is the primary outcome measure, and they will still be partially
         compensated. 8) Further participant refusal for assessments: After inquiring about
         the reasons for discontinuing participation in the study, if we cannot solve the immediate
         problem, we will consider the refusal temporary and situational, and ask for permission
         to re-contact at a later date. If the patient refuses re-contact, however, we will
         consider them to have withdrawn from the study. 9) Monitoring Retention: We will implement
         review of each patient’s participation and risk for loss to follow-up at each team
         meeting in order to proactively problem solve and implement retention strategies.
      
      Inclusion/exclusion criteria
      Inclusion criteria
      1). Ages 18 to 75 years old
      2). Meet DSM-IV criteria for schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder,
         major depression, or another psychotic disorder based on SCID interview
      
      3). BMI of 28 or over
      4). On a stable dose of antipsychotic medication; i.e. at least one month with no
         dose change, and three months from an antipsychotic switch
      
      5). Deemed to be symptomatically stable by the clinical staff for the past two months
      6). Over 7% total body weight increased on antipsychotics for the subjects within
         first year of illness
      
      Exclusion criteria
      1). Meet criteria for current opiate abuse or dependence (confirmed by positive urine
         drug screen for opiates or, if suspected by study doctor via patient history and or
         suspicion of occult opiate use, a naloxone challenge will be performed.)
      
      2). Current history of dementia or mental retardation
      3). Not capable of giving informed consent for participation in the study
      4). Women who are pregnant or breast-feeding
      5). Physical conditions affecting body weight (e.g. Cushing’s disease, polycystic
         ovary syndrome)
      
      6). Diabetes Mellitus (defined as prescribed an anti-diabetic medication for diabetes
         or a hemoglobin A1c level &gt; 7 confirmed by primary care physician at screening)
      
      7). Severe liver dysfunction (serum aminotransferases greater than three times normal),
         acute infectious hepatitis, liver failure.
      
      Study design
      After screening for eligibility and signing the informed consent, eligible subjects
         will be randomized to active Naltrexone 25 mg, Naltrexone 50 mg, or placebo groups
         in a 1:1:1 ratio using a computer randomization procedure at the CMHC research pharmacy,
         blind to both research team and subjects. Separate randomization schedules will be
         applied based on gender and antipsychotic agent to yield an equal number of male and
         female subjects in each arm. This is to control for possible differential gender effects
         of Naltrexone on weight as well as differences brought on by higher and lower weight
         liability medications.
      
      Subjects will take the study medication daily for 52 weeks. Compliance will be monitored
         by pill counts as well as 25 mg riboflavin added to the capsules which provides florescence
         to urine under Wood’s lamp (UV or black light) [37,38]. Subjects will be given a study identification card listing the fact that they may
         be taking naltrexone and this card will include the study emergency cell phone number
         which will be available 24 hours a day, 7 days per week in case of an emergency. Subjects
         will be seen weekly for the first 4 weeks of the study; thereafter they will be seen
         on a bi-weekly (every other week) basis to be assessed (i.e. weight, side effect check,
         paper questionnaires) throughout the remaining 48 weeks of treatment (Table&nbsp;1).
      
      Table 1. Study flow
      Clinical and biochemical assessments
      1). Intake interview including demographics, clinical history, and The Mini-International
         Neuropsychiatric Interview to ascertain diagnosis.
      
      2). Urine toxicology (Utox) screen to rule out substance use and pregnancy tests for
         female subjects.
      
      3). Weight (Wt) to the nearest 0.1kg and height (ht) will be measured to calculate
         BMI. Waist circumference (wc) will be measured with a tape measure placed on the midpoint
         between iliac crest and lowest rib rounded to the nearest 5 mm. Our lab has established
         procedures for wc measurement (Interrater ICC = 95%). Resting blood pressure (bp)
         and pulse will be measured.
      
      4). Laboratory testing: All blood sampling is done via an indwelling 21 gauge Intracath
         catheter placed in an arm or hand vein. Fasting blood samples are obtained from free-flowing
         blood, taking care to discard fluid from the dead space of the system prior to sampling
         and to leave the dead space filled with heparinized saline (50 units/ml) after sampling.
         Blood will be drawn by an institutionally credentialed phlebotomist at the CMHC.
      
      a. Fasting glucose and insulin: Plasma glucose will be analyzed by the glucose oxidase
         method (Yellow Springs Instruments, Ohio). Plasma immunoreactive insulin concentrations
         will be determined with a double antibody radioimmunoassay (Diagnostic, Webster, TX).
      
      a. Lipid Profile: Total cholesterol (Total-C), High-density lipoprotein (HDL-C), and
         triglycerides (TG). Blood will be collected into vacutainers containing no additive.
         Serum cholesterol (Total-C, HDL-C) and TG will be determined by standard enzymatic
         procedures (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).
      
      a. Blood will be collected into vacutainers containing EDTA. Assays of HbA1c will
         be performed using an Ames DCA 2000 analyzer (Miles, Inc., Elkhart, IN).
      
      a. Serum leptin, ghrelin, peptite YY, adiponectin, high sensitivity C-reactive protein
         (CRP), interleukin 6, interleukin-1B, interleukin-18, tumor necrosis factor alpha
         levels (TNF-α) will be assayed by Yale Center for Clinical Investigation core laboratories.
      
      5). Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS): This is one of the most frequently used
         overall measure of schizophrenia symptoms. It will be utilized to demonstrate that
         the naltrexone does not cause any worsening of the illness symptoms apart from the
         usual fluctuations of the natural course [39].
      
      6). Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS): This is a widely used scale to assess
         the severity of positive and negative symptoms observed in psychosis [40].
      
      7). Beck Depression Inventory (BDI): 21-item version is a widely used measure of the
         features and symptoms of depression. The BDI taps a broad range of negative affect
         – not just depression – and is a highly efficient measure for detecting fluctuations
         in broad psychopathology and distress [41].
      
      8). Three Factor Eating Questionnaire, also known as the Eating Inventory (TFEQ) is
         a measure of eating behaviors with three factors: dietary (cognitive) restraint, disinhibition,
         and hunger [42]. The TFEQ is a frequently used measure in obesity trials. The TFEQ has clinical utility
         to assess changes during treatment as well as treatment outcomes [43]. A 24hr food recall is administered subsequent to TFEQ in our lab protocol.
      
      9). The Questionnaire on Craving for Sweet or Rich Foods (QCSRF): The QCSRF is a two
         factor, nine-item scale assessing the presence of cravings for rich and sweet foods
         and has been found to have good psychometric properties [44].
      
      10). The Yale Physical Activity Survey (YPAS): is an interview-administered questionnaire
         that assesses activity participation in number of hours/week in different categories
         (i.e. work, recreation, exercise) and takes about 20 minutes to complete [45,46].
      
      11). Resting Metabolic Rate (RMR): In our experience, this group of subjects does
         not tolerate indirect calorimetry measurements well even with portable devices. Instead,
         we will utilize the Mifflin-St. Jeor predictive formula, which is shown to be highly
         predictive of indirect calorimeter measured RMR, and is best among the available formulas
         for this specific population [47].
      
      12). Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire (Q-LES-Q-18): The Q-LES-Q-18
         is specifically designed to use with schizophrenia patients and focuses on patient’s
         subjective perception of various aspects of their life [48].
      
      13). SF-36 Health Related Quality of Life Questionnaire (SF-36): a 36-item short-form
         was constructed to survey health status in the Medical Outcomes Study [49]. The SF-36 was designed for use in clinical practice and research, health policy
         evaluations, and general population surveys. This instrument is validated for use
         in patients with schizophrenia [50].
      
      14). UKU Side Effect Checklist (UKU): This is a comprehensive rating scale developed
         for psychotropic drugs and a cross-sectional study of side effects in neuroleptic-treated
         patients [51]. Common adverse events related to naltrexone will be added to this scale, as needed.
      
      15). Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS): This is a scale developed for
         use in clinical trials of psychoactive agents for the FDA to be used for safety tracking
         of medications for suicidality [52].
      
      16). Calgary Depression Scale for Schizophrenia (CDSS): This scale is specifically
         designed for the assessment of depression in schizophrenia and has been used widely
         [53].
      
      17). The Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND): This is a scale used to assess
         nicotine dependence [54].
      
      18). Cognitive Battery. The Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS):
         Given the cognitive impairment of schizophrenia, careful assessment of cognition is
         necessary for determining the feasibility of using any medication in this population.
         This is a widely used cognitive battery developed to assess cognition repeatedly in
         patients with schizophrenia. It was found to be as reliable, sensitive as a standard
         battery of tests that requires longer time to administer [55,56].
      
      Statistical analysis
      Sample size and power calculation
      The aim of this study is to compare the efficacy of two different doses of naltrexone
         to placebo. In our pilot study, an effect size of 1.53 (Cohen’s D) was achieved. The
         power analysis assumes a similar weight loss difference between naltrexone and the
         placebo groups, a two-tailed 0.05 significance level, 0.80 power, and the worst case
         scenario of male subjects not responding to naltrexone at all. A three group power
         analysis with a significance level of 0.05 (two sided) was conducted using GPower
         3.03 software [57] after Cohen’s D was converted to an F value. Then, the sample size was adjusted for
         post hoc analyses to detect a 1.52 kg difference (1⁄2 SD of naltrexone group in pilot
         study) between naltrexone 25 mg and 50 mg doses, as well as between the two genders.
         We will follow our protocol for retaining subjects in the study very closely in order
         to reduce attrition. However, since this is an unusually long study for this cohort,
         we will inflate our sample size to adjust for 32% attrition, which was the intervention
         dropout rate in our similar studies over one year. Thus the total sample size will
         be 144, with 48 subjects in each arm, which achieves a power of 0.81 if the pilot
         results hold.
      
      Data analysis
      Data will be double entered into databases and concordance will be double-checked.
         Hard copy documents will be examined to verify questionable observations. Missing
         data will be examined for each variable. Histograms, normal probability plots, and
         numerical summaries (skewness, kurtosis) will be used to examine distributional assumptions
         required for the mixed model analysis described below.
      
      Transformations such as the logarithm, square root, and reciprocal will be considered
         in the event the normality assumption is inadequate. Residual analysis will also be
         performed to evaluate distributional variance and linearity assumptions. For all analyses,
         an alpha threshold of 5% (two-sided) will be used to test for statistical significance
         and will be performed using SAS v9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
      
      Analyses will be performed according to the intent-to-treat (ITT) principle where
         data from any randomized subjects will be analyzed. We will calculate descriptive
         statistics for participants at baseline, and compare naltrexone to placebo participants
         using analysis of variance (ANOVA) for normally distributed covariates and chi-square
         tests for categorical covariates. The impact of baseline variables that demonstrate
         clinically relevant group differences will be assessed in supportive analyses using
         covariate adjustment.
      
      Approach to missing data
      The primary analysis method will use a likelihood-based mixed model, which accommodates
         incomplete observations and operates under the assumption that the missing data is
         missing at random (MAR). Missing data patterns, time to withdrawal and reasons for
         dropout will be compared between two naltrexone and placebo groups. T-tests, cross-tabulations,
         and logistic regression will be used to evaluate whether withdrawal is dependent on
         any observed variables. Finally, should missing data patterns and reasons for missing
         data suggest a bias or confounding, we will conduct sensitivity analyses using pattern
         mixture models to examine the influence that dropout bias (informative missingness)
         may have on treatment differences. Multiple imputation (MI) will also be used in the
         case of data not MAR. Sensitivity analyses will be performed secondarily among study
         completers.
      
      Hypothesis testing
      The primary goal of this study is to compare the weight changes resulting from two
         different doses of naltrexone compared to placebo. The primary ITT analysis will employ
         a linear mixed effects model (LMM) to determine the effect of treatment status (between-subjects
         for: naltrexone 25 mg/50 mg vs. placebo) on the trajectory of weight change over time
         (within-subjects for: study time points). The interaction between treatment and time
         will be modeled and interpreted using graphical displays and post-hoc contrasts on
         least square means. The latter will include estimation of group contrasts at each
         time point and polynomial (linear, etc.) contrasts for time within each group. However,
         the primary contrasts will be each dose compared with control at 52 weeks. Because
         the outcome data are correlated (i.e., weight assessed from the same subject at different
         time points), weight over time will be modeled through the inclusion of random subject
         effects and/or structured variance-covariance matrices, with the best-fitting structure
         determined by Bayesian-Schwartz Information criteria (BIC). Supportive analyses will
         also include covariate adjustment for clinically significant variables (as determined
         from baseline evaluations and also other treatment variables, such as sessions attended).
         The above model will be fit using SAS PROC MIXED (Cary, NC), using restricted maximum
         likelihood (REML). The proportion of subjects achieving 5% weight loss will be compared
         between the treatment groups with the Fisher’s Exact test. The effect of treatment
         assignment on the secondary outcomes, such as BMI, waist circumference, serum lipid
         profile, fasting glucose, and HbA1c will be evaluated using the linear mixed modeling
         approach described above. Type 1 error for secondary outcomes will be adjusted using
         the Bonferroni correction, basing the adjustment on the number of conceptually related
         statistical tests.
      
      Other outcomes
      Schizophrenia symptoms (BPRS), depression (BDI, CDSS), dietary consumption (TFEQ),
         exercise (YPAS), quality of life (Q-LES-Q and SF-36), cognition (BACS) and metabolism/inflammation
         markers will be obtained. Summary statistics (frequencies, percentages, means and
         standard deviations, and medians and interquartile ranges) will be calculated for
         naltrexone vs. placebo at each time point. Appropriate parametric (for normally distributed
         data) and non-parametric (deviation from normality in data distribution) approaches
         will be used to ascertain clinically meaningful group differences at each time point.
         Depending upon the distribution of these outcomes, the effect of naltrexone vs. placebo
         on change over time in each outcome will also be examined with GLMM, making appropriate
         model selections for either binary or continuous outcomes.
      
      Using UKU Side Effect Checklist and C-SSRS, we will list and summarize side effects
         and suicidal tendencies reported in each treatment group. Medication changes that
         could not be avoided during the study will be examined in three groups: no change,
         change from a higher weight liability to a lower weight liability medication, and
         vice versa. Weight liability rankings of antipsychotics will be based on earlier reviews
         [10,58]. Distributions of all variables will be evaluated for normality. Alternative statistical
         approaches such as transformations or non-parametric tests will be used, as required.
      
   

