Methods
   
      We conducted a prospective study of hospitalised patients at the University Hospital
         Marienhospital Herne, Germany. 121&nbsp;T and 121 German patients without Turkish migration
         background (G) filled in a questionnaire during their hospital stay.
      
      Study population
      The University Hospital Marienhospital Herne is part of the medical centre of the
         Ruhr – University Bochum, Germany. It is a 575 bed tertiary hospital with more than
         20,000 admissions per year. The study was carried out at the larger of the two sites
         of the hospital with 362 beds. The following medical departments are located at this
         site: Internal Medicine, Nephrology, Pulmonology and Sleep Medicine, Gastroenterology,
         Cardiology and Angiology, Anaesthesiology, Oncology and Haematology, Geriatrics and
         Early Rehabilitation, General- and Abdominal Surgery, Vascular Surgery, Hand Surgery,
         Radiotherapy, Radiology, Gynaecology and Obstetrics including a unit specialised in
         diseases of the breast, the Newborn-Ward, the Interdisciplinary Intensive Care Unit,
         Central Patients Admission Unit and Palliative Care.
      
      Inclusion criteria
      Adult patients (aged ≥18&nbsp;years) were prospectively included into the study between
         the second and third inpatient day. Informed consent was a precondition for participation.
         Patients were defined as having a Turkish migration background if they had migrated
         from Turkey to the current territory of the Federal Republic of Germany after 1949
         or were born in Germany as Turkish citizens or were born in Germany as German Citizens
         but had at least one parent who migrated from Turkey after 1949 or was born as a Turkish
         Citizen in Germany [9]. T were identified among hospital admissions by an onomastic method [10] according to Sauer et al. [11]. Turkish migration background was confirmed before administration of the questionnaire.
         G served as controls since difficulties of communication are also frequently reported
         by native hospital patients and might not only be due to migration background or lacking
         language skills. A formalised assessment for dementia or cognitive deficits was not
         part of the study. However, patients under guardianship or subject to legal incapacitation
         as well as other patients lacking the competence to consent to study inclusion in
         a legally valid manner were not included into the study. For ethical reasons and patient
         comfort inclusion of patients was only done during weekdays at regular working hours
         (8&nbsp;am to 6&nbsp;pm) and did not interfere with medical diagnostics or treatment. To determine
         the sample size required for detecting a medium effect size with an Alpha error of
         5% a prospective power calculation was performed [12] assuming a sigma of 1.2 in both groups. To obtain a power of 80% the inclusion of
         92 patients in each group would be necessary.
      
      Development and administration of a questionnaire
      A specific questionnaire was developed for a reliable quantification of the interaction
         between patients and physicians. If applicable the items of the questionnaire were
         shaded in 5 progressive grades to allow a more precise quantification and better comparability
         (e.g. 1 = very dissatisfied, 2 = dissatisfied, 3 = neither satisfied nor dissatisfied,
         4 = satisfied, 5 = very satisfied). Two bilingual translators converted the questionnaire
         from the German into the Turkish language. After a third translator had consented
         to it the questionnaire was tested with regard to its comprehensibility in a pilot
         test with patients from each group (T, G) and optimized thereafter. The following
         features were included in both versions of the questionnaire: migration background,
         demographic features and school education. Other items vary according to the patient’s
         ethnicity: 3 (T) items assessed language preferences during different activities of
         daily life (see Table&nbsp;1), 5 (T) or 1 (G) items assessed linguistic proficiency (see Table&nbsp;2), 5 (T) or 4 (G) items assessed the interaction between patient and physician (see
         Table&nbsp;3), 2 (T,G) items assessed the flow of information concerning diagnostic or therapeutic
         procedures (see Table&nbsp;4) and 3 (T) items assessed translation aspects (see Table&nbsp;5).
      
      Table 1. Language most currently spoken by patients with Turkish migration background
      Table 2. Self-rated German and Turkish linguistic proficiency and literacy
      Table 3. Interaction between patient and physician in charge
      Table 4. Obtaining informed consent for invasive diagnostic or therapeutic procedures
      Table 5. Translation of information concerning invasive diagnostic or therapeutic procedures
      After obtaining informed consent for study participation the questionnaire was completed
         by the study participants in the German (G) or Turkish (T) language depending on which
         group they belonged to. A bilingual person was available to help physically disabled
         or illiterate persons fill in the test.
      
      Analysis
      Analyses were conducted using SPSS (version 20.0.0; SPSS Inc, Chicago, USA). To compare
         numerical data the Student T test was chosen. Categorical data were compared using
         the Fisher's exact test. A binary logistic regression analysis was performed to assess
         the effect of different explanatory variables on the quality of the reception of medical
         information by T (Question: “How well did you understand what the physician told you?”).
         For the purpose of the regression analysis we divided each of the relevant explanatory
         variables into two categories (patient’s nationality: German and Turkish-German vs.
         Turkish; patient’s country of birth: Turkey vs. Germany; language spoken at home or
         during leisure activities: German or Turkish and German vs. Turkish or Kurdish; German
         language and literacy, German language in daily activities as well as Turkish language
         and literacy: “very bad”, “bad” or “average” vs. “good” or “very good”. The response
         variable (quality of the reception of information) itself was categorised into “not
         at all”, “a little” and “mediocre” vs. “well” and “very well”. The study was approved
         by the ethics committee of the medical faculty of the Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany.
      
   

