Methods
   
      Honey samples
      Honey samples from the stingless bee M. compressipes manaosensis (Apidae, Meliponinae) were provided by the Research Group on Bees (GPA) from the
         National Institute of Amazon Research (INPA) in Manaus, Amazonas (honey A). Honey
         samples were collected twice, during the dry and rainy seasons. The harvesting took
         place in March 2009 (dry season) and November 2009 (rainy season). It was collected
         3 samples from each season.
      
      These Melipona species keep the honey in compartments within the hives, referred to as pots, and
         for this reason an adapted 20&nbsp;mL syringe containing a sterile tube was used to withdraw
         the honey from the pots. This procedure was carried out by trained GPA technicians.
         The honey withdrawn was immediately stored in sterile dark glass recipients to avoid
         photodegradation, and kept at 5°C.
      
      Three commercial honey samples were also included in this study: eucalyptus honey
         (predominant blooming) from Rio Grande do Sul (honey B); honey produced by Apis sp. bees from Ceará (honey C); and honey produced by the stingless bees known as
         Jandaíra (M. subnitida, Apidae, Meliponinae) produced by beekeepers from the community of the Tupé Sustainable
         Development Reserve (RDS Tupé), located in the rural zone of Manaus (honey D). Harvesting
         of honey B-D took place in 2009.
      
      Bacterial strains
      Strains of Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli (O157:H7), Proteus vulgaris, Shigella sonnei, Salmonella paratyphi and Klebsiella sp. were kindly provided by the Tropical Virology Laboratory of INPA. Bacterial cultures
         were kept in nutrient agar at 36°C.
      
      The bacterial strains were previously tested regarding its antibiotic susceptibility,
         as showed in Table&nbsp;1.
      
      Table 1. Antibiotic susceptibility presented by different bacterial strains used in this work
      Antibacterial activity assays
      For the antimicrobial assays the bacterial strains were grown overnight in Müeller-Hilton
         broth at 36.5°C. The bacterial concentration was standardized to 3 × 108 CFU ml-1 using the McFarland scale.
      
      In this study two different assays were performed to evaluate the antibacterial potential
         of the honey samples: agar-well diffusion and broth macrodilution.
      
      For the well diffusion assay Müeller-Hilton solid media was prepared on petri dishes,
         followed by autoclaving at 121°C for 20&nbsp;min. Approximately 5&nbsp;ml of the sterilized
         media was poured onto the dishes (65 × 15&nbsp;mm), in an aseptic environment. The diffusion
         test was performed according to Hernández et al. [10], with a few modifications. Seven wells of 3&nbsp;mm were made in the agarized medium after
         inoculation with the bacterial strains. Honey samples were diluted in bidistilled
         water in the proportions of 1:1, 1:2, 1:4, and 1:8 (v/v). The wells were filled with
         30&nbsp;μl of the honey samples (diluted samples, non-diluted samples and bidistilled water
         as the negative control). The plates were incubated at 36.5°C for 24&nbsp;h before visual
         assessment of the inhibition zones. The experiment was repeated three times. The quantification
         of microbial growth inhibition was determined by measuring the diameter of clear zones
         of microbial growth around the wells in the agar (including the well itself). The
         minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was considered the lowest concentration capable
         of inhibiting the visible bacterial growth.
      
      For the bacterial broth macrodilution assay, appropriate amounts of the honey samples
         and the culture broth to give the desired concentrations (1:1, 1:2, 1:4, 1:6 and 1:8;
         v/v) were placed into 5&nbsp;ml tubes. The bacterial standardized inoculum (30&nbsp;μl) was
         poured into the tubes, homogenized and incubated at 36.5°C for 24&nbsp;h. Samples taken
         from the tubes were inoculated into petri dishes containing nutrient agar to verify
         bacterial growth. Inhibition of bacterial growth was visible as a clear broth and
         the presence of growth was detected by the presence of turbidity. The positive control
         was the tube containing the culture broth and the bacterial inoculum; the negative
         control contained the culture broth and the honey sample. The experiment was repeated
         three times.
      
      Minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) of honey
      The MBC is the lowest honey concentration capable of killing a bacterial population.
         It was determined using the incubated tubes from the macrodilution assay, where a
         100&nbsp;μl sample from each tube was inoculated into petri dishes containing nutrient
         agar. The plates were incubated at 36.5°C for 24&nbsp;h. The MBC was considered the lowest
         concentration of honey where no bacterial growth was observed on the agar surface
         (99.9% of bacterial death) [11]. All tests were repeated three times.
      
      Statistical analysis
      All of the experimental results were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) of
         three determinations. The presence of a significant difference between honey samples
         was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey test (p ≥ 0.05) comparison using
         BioStat 5.3.5.
      
      Phenolic compounds extraction from honey
      Liquid-liquid extraction with ethyl acetate was used, according to the methodology
         described by Wahdan [12]. A 20% honey stock solution was prepared in distilled water, and after separating
         50&nbsp;ml of this solution the pH was adjusted to 3.5. To this 50&nbsp;ml aliquot, 50&nbsp;ml of
         ethyl acetate and 1&nbsp;g of sodium chloride was added in a separation funnel. The funnel
         was shaken for 5&nbsp;min for the extraction of phenolic compounds. The ethyl acetate fraction
         was then withdrawn and stored in a test tube. This procedure was repeated three times.
         After the extraction, 150&nbsp;ml of ethyl acetate honey extract, was obtained and submitted
         to vacuum evaporation at 30°C. The concentrated extract was stored at -18°C.
      
      Sample preparation for chromatography
      An aliquot (2&nbsp;ml) of each concentrated sample was collect with a 5&nbsp;ml sterile syringe
         and filtered through 0.45&nbsp;μm Teflon membranes. The filtered samples were stored in
         sterile 2&nbsp;ml vials. Prior to the injection into the chromatographer column, 400&nbsp;μl
         of the samples were added to 600&nbsp;μl of previously filtered methanol.
      
      Preparation of standards
      Apigenin (5&nbsp;mg) and pinocembrin (25&nbsp;mg) were acquired from Sigma-Aldrich Co. The rutin
         standard was kindly donated by the Laboratory of phytochemistry of the Federal University
         of Amazonas (UFAM). Stock solutions were prepared by the dissolution of each compound
         within HPLC-grade methanol. Apigenin and rutin were diluted in 10&nbsp;ml of methanol and
         pinocembrin was dissolved in 50&nbsp;ml of the solvent. The standard solutions were filtered
         through 0.45&nbsp;μm Teflon membranes and injected into the chromatographer column under
         the same analytical conditions used for the honey samples.
      
      High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis
      The analysis was performed in a Varian HPLC System equipped with an autosampler. For
         the separation of phenolic components a reverse-phase C-18 column (150 × 4.6&nbsp;mm × 1/4)
         was used. The mobile phase consisted of an isocratic gradient system as described
         by Ferreres et al. [13] with some modifications. Water and methanol were used as the eluent at a flow rate
         of 1.00&nbsp;ml min-1. To achieve better separation, a gradient elution was used starting with 30% methanol
         which remained isocratic for the first 15&nbsp;min, followed 40% methanol at 20&nbsp;min, 45%
         methanol at 30&nbsp;min, 60% methanol at 50&nbsp;min and 80% methanol at 52&nbsp;min before becoming
         isocratic again until the end of analysis at 60&nbsp;min. Chromatograms were recorded at
         340 and 290&nbsp;nm.
      
      Flavonoid identification
      The flavonoids were identified by two techniques. Firstly, a chromatographic comparison
         between the peak retention times obtained for the samples and for the standard flavonoids
         was carried out. The technique of standard addition was also used, which consists
         of adding known amounts of each flavonoid standard into the sample. If there is an
         increase in the peak height, and thus in the peak area, without the appearance of
         shoulders or distortions, this is strong evidence that this peak is the flavonoid
         of interest. A comparison of the peak retention times was also carried out.
      
   

