Methods
   
      Drosophila stocks and culture
      Flies were raised at 25°C on standard cornmeal/agar media, at 50% humidity and a 12-hour
         light/12-hour dark daily cycle. Fly stocks used in this study were obtained from the
         Vienna Drosophila RNAi Center, VDRC, Vienna, Austria and Bloomington Drosophila Stock
         Center, Bloomington, Indiana, USA, or kindly provided by Udai Pandey (GFP-CL1) [13] and Pablo Wappner (LDH-GFP) [29] (see Additional file 16: Figure S16 for a list of stocks). Note that KK, GD and JF lines are long hairpin-based
         RNAi transgenics, and HMS stocks contain short microRNA-based silencing constructs.
      
      Additional file 16: Figure S16. List of Drosophila stocks used in this study.
         	Format: PDF 
         	Size: 278KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Adobe Acrobat Reader
      RT-PCR, western blots and immunostainings
      Total RNA was isolated from L3 stage larvae using Purelink RNA Mini Kit (Ambion),
         followed by cDNA synthesis with Revertaid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas)
         and PCR amplification at 25 cycles. The following primers were used (designed to overlap
         exon-exon boundaries to prevent accidental amplification from genomic DNA): TACTCCTCCCGACACAAAGC,
         CTGGGTCATCTTCTCACGGT (Actin5C), TGGATCGACGCTGATAAAGA, GTCTCCTGAAACGGGCAAT (p62), CTTGGATCGAACTCAGCACA,
         CAATGTTCCAGCTACTGGGTG (BNIP3).
      
      Western blots were carried out as described [6,25], using primary antibodies: rabbit anti-p62 (1:5,000) [21], rabbit anti-Atg8a (1:5,000) [25] or mouse monoclonal anti-Tubulin AA4.3 (1:1,000, DSHB), followed by alkaline phosphatase
         conjugated goat anti-rabbit, anti-mouse secondary antibodies (1:5,000, Millipore).
         Immunostainings were done as before [21,25], using primary antibodies chicken anti-GFP (1:1,500, Invitrogen), rabbit anti-Atg8a
         (1:500, gift of Katja Köhler) [20], rabbit anti-p62 (1:2,000) [21], rabbit anti-ubiquitin (1:50, Dako), rabbit anti-active caspase 3 (1:500, Cell Signaling).
         Secondary antibodies were Alexa 488 anti-chicken, Alexa 546 anti-rabbit (1:1,500,
         Invitrogen).
      
      Please see Additional file 17: Figure S17 for original images of RT-PCR gels and western blots.
      
      Additional file 17: Figure S17. Original images for gels and western blots. Black boxes highlight cropped regions,
         which are shown in image panels as indicated.
         	Format: PDF 
         	Size: 207KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Adobe Acrobat Reader
      Genetics and treatments
      Clonal analysis in larval fat bodies was done as exhaustively described previously
         [6,18,19,21-25]. Briefly, cell clones were spontaneously generated by Flp-mediated excision of the
         FRT (Flp Recombination Target, &gt;) cassette from Act &gt; CD2 &gt; Gal4 to activate UAS-dependent
         transcription of overexpression, dominant-negative and RNAi transgenes, together with
         the GFP reporters indicated in figure legends. Note that cell clones arose in embryos,
         and all of our analyses were carried out in L3 stage larvae at 84-90 hours after egg
         deposition. We also generated stable lines of hsFlp[22], Act &gt; CD2 &gt; Gal4, UAS-mCD8-GFP (all recombined together on chromosome X); UAS-Rpn2 or UAS-Rpt1 or UAS-Prosβ2 RNAi (located on autosomes). These lines were crossed to various Atg, p62 and sima RNAi and dominant-negative lines in genetic interaction tests. RNAi was mediated
         in whole fat bodies by cg-Gal4 for electron microscopy. As systemic knockdown of proteasomal genes resulted in early
         stage lethality, hsFlp[22], Act &gt; CD2 &gt; Gal4, UAS-RNAi stocks were heat shocked for 1 hour at 37 degrees at 48 hours after egg deposition
         to induce gene silencing in polyploid cells for western blots. Larvae of the age 60-66
         hours after egg deposition were transferred to fresh medium containing 3 mg/ml chloroquine
         (Sigma) for a 24-hour treatment in autophagic flux experiments.
      
      Histology and imaging
      Lysotracker stainings were carried out as described [19,21-25]. Briefly, larvae were allowed to feed on food supplemented with plenty of yeast (fed)
         or floated in 20% sucrose solution for 3 hours (starved). Fat bodies were dissected,
         stained with Lysotracker Red (Invitrogen) and DAPI in PBS for 5 minutes, and photographed
         live. A Zeiss Axioimager M2 microscope equipped with an Apotome2 unit and a Plan-NeoFluar
         40× 0.75 NA objective was used to capture images with Axiovision software. Primary
         images were processed in Adobe Photoshop to produce final figures. Tissues were processed
         for transmission electron microscopy analysis as described previously [6,18,25]. Images were captured on a Jeol JEM-1011 microscope using an Olympus Morada 11 megapixel
         camera and iTEM software (Olympus).
      
      Statistics
      Autophagic structures in ultrastructural images, Lysotracker Red (LTR) and mCherry-Atg8a
         puncta were manually counted in Photoshop. Statistical evaluation of GFP-CL1, p62
         and anti-Atg8a images was carried out using ImageJ (NIH) as described [21,25]. As proteasome RNAi and sima overexpressing cells were usually smaller than control cells, the numbers of dots
         per GFP-positive clone area or control tissue area were counted. To avoid errors owing
         to cell size differences, dot numbers shown in figures are normalized to control cells,
         that is, if the average size of GFP-positive cells was 10% of control cells and contained
         5 dots on average, then the normalized number of dots per cell is 50 [21].
      
      Images taken from multiple individual larvae per genotype (n) as indicated in figure
         legends were evaluated. Data were analyzed in PASW Statistics 18 (IBM). After testing
         for normality of data distribution, p values were calculated by Student’s t tests
         or Mann-Whitney u tests in pairwise comparisons for normal or non-normal distribution
         data, respectively. We used ANOVA for multiple comparisons of normal distribution
         data and Kruskal-Wallis test for non-normal distribution data. Bar charts show average
         values and standard deviations. Regression analyses were also done in SPSS.
      
      LDH-GFP fluorescence was detemined with ImageJ (NIH) software. Individual larvae were
         selected in the greyscale GFP channel, and the mean gray value was measured. Backgrund
         fluorescence from near each larva was subtracted from the mean gray value.
      
   

