Methods
   
      Design
      Face-to-face, in-depth, semi-structured interviews were conducted with GPs in Greater
         Manchester, England who were participating in a larger programme of work which aimed
         to validate prospectively a risk assessment tool for predicting chronicity in patients
         with IBS. Initially we approached all practices that had a Service Level Agreement
         with the Greater Manchester Comprehensive Local Research Network (CLRN). We then took
         a staged approach to roll the study out to general practices within Primary Care Organisations
         in Greater Manchester. The total number of practices recruited to the study was 58.
         At the time of recruitment practices were informed about both the Risk Assessment
         Study and the qualitative interview study. GPs were invited to contact us if they
         were interested in taking part in the qualitative study. The role of the practices
         was to recruit patients to the study, rather than use the predictive tool. Data were
         collected between March and December 2011.
      
      Sampling
      Purposive sampling was used to maximise the variation of the sample of GPs. GPs who
         were invited to participate in the main study were also invited to participate in
         this nested qualitative study and two GPs agreed. The remaining 17 GPs were recruited
         from the 58 practices who had agreed to recruit patients for the main study. We sampled
         practices according to location, and asked if one of the GPs would participate in
         the interview study. As recruitment continued, we tried to ensure a spread of participants
         across gender, ethnicities, age ranges and years of experience in practice. Recruitment
         was then continued until theme saturation was achieved.
      
      Data collection
      Interviews were conducted, with written consent, at GPs’ premises, by two of the authors
         (EFH and VH). Interviews lasted between 20 and 70 minutes (mean 42 minutes). The topic
         guide was developed from review of the existing literature and discussion within the
         research team. The topic guide, designed to be used flexibly, was modified in the
         light of emerging themes. The main areas explored were GPs’ views on the aetiology
         of IBS, how they make the diagnosis of IBS and explain this to patients, treatments
         offered to patients, and the potential usefulness of a tool to aid their management
         decisions. The risk assessment tool was described to GPs as a management device to
         help stratify patients into those who might become high consulters in the long term,
         and thus may aid future decisions about management of these patients.
      
      Interviews were fully transcribed. Data coding was by constant comparison across interviews
         [19], by individual authors (CCG, EFH, VH and SH) and emerging themes were agreed through
         discussion amongst all authors, from different professional backgrounds (academic
         primary care, health services research, epidemiology). An iterative approach to data
         collection and analysis was taken; coding and conceptual categories were constantly
         reviewed and refined in the light of new interview data and ongoing discussion in
         the research team. Tensions between GP descriptions of their management and the NICE
         guideline were particularly investigated in the analysis. The topic guide was modified
         to allow for further exploration of emerging themes. N Vivo 9 (QSR International Pty
         Ltd, Victoria, Australia) was used to store and manage the data.
      
   

