Methods
   
      Preparation of the salmon-derived collagen sponge disc containing OP-1
      The crosslinked atelocollagen sponge disc was prepared from the fresh skin of chum
         salmon by acid solubilization and subsequent pepsin digestion, according to a procedure
         previously reported [6]. Briefly, the lyophilized salmon-derived collagen was added to 100&nbsp;mL of diluted
         HCl (pH&nbsp;3) to a concentration of 0.5% (w/v) and stirred overnight at 4 degrees Celsius.
         Next, 1&nbsp;ml of the collagen solution was transferred into a multiple 48-well plate
         for tissue culture (Asahi Techno Glass, Tokyo, Japan) and then frozen at −70 degrees
         Celsius for 12&nbsp;hours. The frozen plates were placed into a lyophilizer (FDU-830, Tokyo
         Rikakikai, Tokyo, Japan) for 24&nbsp;hours. The obtained porous materials were immersed
         in a 4-M NaCl aqueous solution containing 1% (w/v) water-soluble EDC (Dojindo, Tokyo,
         Japan) and kept at 4 degrees Celsius for 24&nbsp;hours. These materials were washed three
         times with diluted water and then lyophilized again. Thus, we obtained the crosslinked
         atelocollagen sponge. The degree of crosslinking (the decrease ratio in the free amine
         group contents of the crosslinked sample to the uncrosslinked sample) of this collagen
         sponge was approximately 40% [12]. Our previous in vivo study [12] showed that the crosslinked SCS sponge did not show any detrimental effects in the
         knee joint, when they were implanted into an osteochondral defect created in the rabbit
         knee. From this material, we created the OP1-SCS disc for implantation in the present
         study (Figure&nbsp;1). Each disc had a diameter of 4.5&nbsp;mm and a height of 3&nbsp;mm. We injected 10-μg OP-1
         (R&amp;D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) dissolved in 1-ml saline solution into a core
         portion of the disc immediately before implantation. This dose of OP-1 was chosen
         based on a previous study [18].
      
      Study design and animal experimentation
      Animal experiments were carried out in the Institute of Animal Experimentation, Hokkaido
         University School of Medicine under the Rules and Regulation of the Animal Care and
         Use Committee. A total of 24 mature female Japanese white rabbits, weighing 3.9 ± 0.5&nbsp;kg,
         were used in this study. An operation for each animal was performed under intravenous
         anesthesia (pentobarbital, 25&nbsp;mg/kg) under sterile conditions. In each animal, the
         bilateral knee joints were exposed through a medial parapatellar incision, and the
         patella was dislocated laterally. A full-thickness osteochondral defect having a diameter
         of 4.3&nbsp;mm and a depth of 3&nbsp;mm was created in each femoral trochlea, using a sharp
         drill. Then, in 12 of the 24 rabbits, we implanted an OP1-SCS disc into the defect
         in the right knee (Group-I knees) using the press-fit technique. In the remaining
         12 rabbits, we implanted a salmon-derived collagen sponge disc without OP-1 into the
         defect in the right knee (Group-II knees) in the same manner. In each group, we applied
         no treatment for a defect in the left knee to obtain the untreated control (Group-III
         knees). The incised joint capsule and the skin wound were closed in layers with 3–0
         nylon sutures, and an antiseptic spray dressing was applied. Postoperatively, each
         animal was allowed unrestricted activity in a cage (310 × 550 × 320&nbsp;mm) without any
         joint immobilization. All rabbits were sacrificed at 12&nbsp;weeks after surgery. This
         period was chosen because it was considered to be the best period to compare the degree
         of cartilage regeneration among the 3 groups according to the previous study [12]. The knee joints were immediately removed en bloc with the surrounding tissue. In
         each group, 10 animals were used for histological and immunohistological evaluations,
         and the remaining 2 were used for real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses.
      
      Gross observations and histological evaluations
      At the time of sacrifice, the tissue regenerated in the osteochondral defect underwent
         gross observations, and was quantitatively evaluated with the grading scale reported
         by Wayne et al. [19]. The maximum total score was 16 points. A distal portion of the resected femur was
         fixed in a 10% neutral buffered formalin solution for 3&nbsp;days, decalcified with 50&nbsp;mM
         ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid for a period of 3–4&nbsp;weeks, and then cast in a paraffin
         block. The femur was sectioned perpendicular to the longitudinal axis, and stained
         with Hematoxylin-Eosin and Safranin-O. For immuno-histological evaluations, monoclonal
         antibody (anti-hCL(II), purified IgG, Fuji Chemical Industries Ltd, Toyama, Japan)
         was used as primary antibodies. Immunostaining was carried out according to the manufacturer’s
         instructions using the Envision immunostaining system (DAKO Japan, Kyoto, Japan).
         Finally, the sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. Histology was evaluated
         with a scoring system reported by Wayne et al. [19]. Subsequently, the maximum total score was 19 points. In addition, for each defect,
         randomly selected 3 sections of central portion with Safranin-O were evaluated by
         2 authors (E.K., Y.K.) under a blinded manner. Cellularity of the nuclei in the proteoglycan-rich
         tissue were observed with light microscopy.
      
      Real-time PCR analysis
      Total RNA was extracted from the tissues regenerated in the defect using the RNeasy
         mini kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA) at 12&nbsp;weeks. RNA quality from each sample was
         assured by the A260/280 absorbance ratio. The RNA (100&nbsp;ng) was reverse-transcribed
         into single strand cDNA using PrimeScript® RT reagent Kit (TakaraBio, Ohtsu, Japan).
         The RT reaction was carried out for 15&nbsp;min at 37 degrees Celsius and then for 5&nbsp;sec
         at 85 degrees Celsius. All oligonucleotide primer sets were designed based upon the
         published mRNA sequence. The expected amplicon lengths ranged from 93 to 189&nbsp;bp. The
         sequences of primers used in real time PCR analyses for rabbit regenerative tissues
         were as follows: type 2 collagen forward GACCATCAATGGCGGCTTC; reverse CACGCTGTTCTTGCAGTGGTAG.
         Aggrecan forward GCTACGACGCCATCTGCTAC; reverse GTCTGGACCGTGATGTCCTC. SOX9 forward
         AACGCCGAGCTCAGCAAGA; reverse TGGTACTTGTAGTCCGGGTGGTC. GAPDH forward CCCTCAATGACCACTTTGTGAA;
         reverse AGGCCATGTGGACCATGAG. The real-time PCR was performed in Thermal Cycler Dice®
         TP800 (TakaraBio, Ohtsu, Japan) by using SYBR® Premix Ex TaqTM (TakaraBio, Ohtsu,
         Japan). cDNA template (5&nbsp;ng) was used for real-time PCR in a final volume of 25 microliters.
         cDNA was amplified according to the following conditions: 95 degrees Celsius for 5&nbsp;sec
         and 60 degrees Celsius for 30&nbsp;sec at 40 amplification cycles. Fluorescene changes
         were monitored with SYBR Green after every cycle. A dissociation curve analysis was
         performed (0.5 degrees Celsius /sec increase from 60 to 95 degrees Celsius with continuous
         fluorescene readings) at the end of cycles to ensure that single PCR products were
         obtained. The amplicon size and reaction specificity were confirmed by 2.5% agarose
         gel electrophoresis. The results were evaluated using the Thermal Cycler Dice® Real
         Time System software program (TakaraBio, Ohtsu, Japan). Glyceroaldehyde-3-phosphate
         dehydrogenase (GAPDH) primers were used to normalize samples.
      
      Statistical analysis
      A priori power analysis was performed. A sample size was calculated to have 70% to
         83% power to test the hypothesis. All data were described as the mean and standard
         deviation values. The one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed with the
         Fischer’s PLSD test for post hoc multiple comparisons. The significance limit was
         set at p = 0.05. For calculation, the StatView 5.0 software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary,
         NC, USA) was used.
      
   

