Methods
   
      Design and patients
      Ninety-four AECOPD patients admitted into the intensive care unit (ICU) of our hospital
         from June 2008 to March 2012 were included, all of whom in accordance with the criteria
         of COPD guideline constituted by Chinese Society of Respiratory Diseases in 2007 and
         the diagnosis standard of pulmonary encephalopathy[2,3]. They were divided into the control group (BMI&lt;21) and the study group (BMI&gt;21) in
         accordance with the criteria of COPD guideline constituted by American and European
         Society of Respiratory Diseases in 2004, BMI&lt;21 was underweight and should be treated
         by nutritional support[4].
      
      The study group consist of 23 males and 15 females aged from 41 to 85 years old (average
         of 64.50±4.75 years) and the course of their diseases are from 3 months to 22.23 years
         (average of 62.34±3.50 months), among whom there are 6 patients with type III and
         32 patients with type IV COPD. The control group consist of 32 males and 24 females
         aged from 42 to 86 years old (average of 63.70±3.90 years) and the course of their
         diseases are from 4 months to 21.70 years (average of 63.18±4.22 months), among whom
         there are 12 patients with type III and 44 patients with type IV COPD. There is no
         significant difference between these two groups in age, gender, course of diseases,
         type of COPD, the score of APACHE II, result of blood gas analysis (P&gt;0.05).
      
      Treatment
      These two groups were treated by similar symptomatic therapies such as antibacterial,
         antispasmodic, relieving asthma, antitussive, expectorant, correction of electrolyte
         imbalance and acid-base balance disorders, strengthen nutritional support, etc. Patients
         were ventilated using assistance controlled mechanical ventilation (ACMV) during the
         initial mechanical ventilation, and switched to synchronous intermittent mechanical
         ventilation (SIMV) and pressure support ventilation (PSV) and positive expiratory
         end pressure (PEEP) with the improvement of patients’ condition. Mode and parameters
         of mechanical ventilation were adjusted according to patients’ condition. Patients
         were ventilated using SIMV and PSV and PEEP, and switched to PSV and PEEP after the
         PIC window appeared. The level of PSV was decreased gradually to 5-8cmH2O with the improvement of patients’ condition; at least 12 hours later, exudation
         was conducted and followed by non-invasive mechanical ventilation. The non-invasive
         mechanical ventilation that we used were bi-level positive airway pressure-spontaneous
         and timing mode (BiPAP-S/T); the level of inspiration positive airway pressure (IPAP)
         was 4-7cmH2O (1cmH2O = 0.0198KPa), and then weaning from mechanical ventilation after spontaneous breathe
         smoothly, instead of nasal breathing. These two groups weighed every day and kept
         the balance of body fluid. The treatment of the study group was the same as that of
         the control group until BMI &gt;21, then weaning from mechanical ventilation.
      
      Observation items
      The following indices were recorded at different times including before mechanical
         ventilation such as BMI, variation of blood gas analysis, invasive mechanical ventilation
         time, non-invasive mechanical ventilation time, total mechanical ventilation time,
         VAP occurred rate, re-intubation rate, hospital mortality rate in 28 days.
      
      Statistical analysis
      All parameters were expressed as the mean ±standard deviation (SD), with the use of
         SPSS13.0 software. All indices were analyzed by independent-sample t test and x2 test between the two groups, and by paired-sample t test between different times
         for each group. A P value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
      
   

