Methods
   
      The general experimental design, reagents and materials are described in an Additional
         file [see Additional file 9].
      
      Additional file 9. Additional methodology details, including: experimental design, error and replicates,
            isolation of endophytic fungi, fungal genotyping, terminal restriction fragment length
            polymorphism (tRFLP), Taxol quantification, callus and suspension culture initiation
            protocol, RT-PCR, quantitative real-time PCR, and identification of taxadiene synthase
            (TS) enzyme by Western blot analysis.
         	Format: DOC 
         	Size: 111KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Word Viewer
      Isolation of endophytic fungi and fungal genotyping
      Previously, a Taxol-producing endophytic fungus was cultured from old branches of
         Taxus x media plants cultivated on the University of Guelph Main Campus and Arboretum [16] (Guelph, Canada). The fungal ITS sequence matched to Paraconiothyrium spp [see Additional file 2], and the fungus was assigned the name Paraconiothyrium SSM001 [16]. For taxonomic classification and to ensure consistency between experiments, every
         fungal culture was genotyped by PCR and DNA sequencing of the internal transcribed
         spacer regions (ITS) of 18S rDNA [40] to confirm both strain identity and purity [see Additional file 9 for details].
      
      Terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (tRFLP)
      Specific fluorescent labelled fungal 18S primers were used for amplification. The
         primer sequences were nu-SSU-0817 5`-TTAGCATGGAATAATRRAATAGGA-3’ and nu-SSU-1536 5’-ATTGCAATGCYCTATCCCCA-3’
         which amplify a 762 bp fragment [41]. TRFLP separation analysis used a capillary electrophoresis ABI prism 310 DNA Sequencer
         (PE Applied Biosystems, Canada). TRFLP data was analyzed using ABI Prism 310 Collection
         version 2.0 and Peakscanner Analysis Software (version 1.0) [see Additional file 9 for details].
      
      Taxol quantification
      Taxol was verified and quantified either by a competitive immunoassay procedure [42,43], TLC spot densitometry [44,45] or by HPLC-UV. Additional details have been published [16] and are in an Additional file [see Additional file 9].
      
      Maxim XL fungicide effect on Paraconiothyrium SSM001
      
      PDA plates were mixed with different concentration of the Maxim XL fungicide (0, 0.1,
         0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 5.0 μM), and left to dry. A small piece of fungal mycelia
         was cultured separately on each plate surface and the plates were kept in the dark
         at room temperature for two weeks. Fungal mycelial growth was observed by the naked
         eye.
      
      Effect of fungicide on Taxus x media plantlets
      
      In a pilot experiment, three different volumes (200 μL/plant, 500 μL/plant and 1 mL/plant)
         of Maxim XL fungicide (Syngenta) were injected into stems of one-year old Taxus x media plantlets or buffer (water). This was followed by RNA extraction and quantification
         of fungal endophytes by RT-PCR using specific fungal primers. In comparison to buffer
         injected plantlets, only 1 mL of fungicide/ plant was effective in decreasing the
         amount of endophytic fungi including Paraconiothyrium SSM001 using fungal 18S quantification. Subsequently, one-year old T. x media plantlets were injected with 1 mL/plant fungicide into the stem just passing beyond
         the outer bark. The plantlets received another two doses of the fungicide two months
         apart. The plantlets were left to grow for another 5 months with weekly watering.
         The plantlets were kept at room temperature (25°C) under 24 h cool white fluorescent
         light (60–80 μmol m-2 sec-2). Both the control and treated plantlets were arranged randomly. Only the stems were
         analyzed.
      
      Effects of fungicide and herbicides on Taxol yield
      For each biological replicate, 4–6 wood pieces randomly pooled from fresh T. x media branches of mature trees obtained from the University of Guelph Campus, were incubated
         with 15 μM of either Maxim-XL fungicide (consists of 25 g/L fludioxonil, 10 g/L metalaxyl-M),
         isoxaben herbicide (N-(3-(1-ethyl-1-methylpropyl)-5-isoxazolyl)-2,6-dimethoxy benzamide
         powder), or buffer (water) for 24 h in the dark at 25°C with shaking at 50 rpm. The
         wood pieces were then washed with water three times and then sterilized as mentioned
         earlier prior to culturing on PDA medium for 2 weeks. Four grams of each treated wood
         were ground, and 50 mg was used for RNA extraction; the remainder was used for taxane
         extraction and Taxol quantification.
      
      Taxol fungicide assay
      To test for the fungicide effects of Taxol, Paraconiothyrium SSM001 and six plant fungal pathogens and endophytes were incubated separately on
         PDA plates containing Taxol or the solvent control. Based on the literature and testing
         serial concentrations of Taxol (data not shown), 12 μM Taxol was chosen as the IC50.
         The following fungal pathogens were chosen: Heterobasidion annosum, Perenniporia subacida, an Alternaria ssp., a Pestalotiopsis ssp., Phaeolus schweinitzii and Fusarium graminearum. In all the experiments, the fungal plates were incubated in the dark at 25°C and
         the fungal growth was followed for one week.
      
      RT-PCR
      For the gene, 3-hydroxy-3-methyl glutaryl CoA reductase, primers PlantHMGRF2 (5’-TCCCTGTGGGTGTTGCAGGGC-3’)
         and PlantHMGRR2 (5’-AACCTAACAACGGAGCCC -3’) were used. For 3-deoxy xylulose-5-phosphate
         reductoisomerase (DXR), primers PlantDXRF4 (5’-AGGTGGAACCATGACTGG-3’) and PlantDXRR4
         (5’-TGCAGCATACTTTCTGGCCC-3’) were used. For taxadiene synthase, primers TSinF (5’-GGTTTGCTCCAAATCAGGGC-3’)
         and TSinR (5’-TAACATTGTGGTGCCACAGA-3’) were used. For fungal quantification, fungal
         18S rRNA specific primers were used: 18SrDNA-RtF (5’-GGCATCAGTATTCAGTTGTC-3’) and
         18SrDNA-RtR (5’-GTTAAGACTACGACGGTATC-3’) [46]. Taxus 18S rRNA was used as an internal standard for normalization using the following primers:
         Tax18SF2 (5’-TTTTCCCTTTGCAATGCC-3’) and Tax18SR2 (5’-TCGCCCTTGTAATAACCCG-3’) [see
         Additional file 9 for details].
      
      Identification of taxadiene synthase (TS) enzyme by Western blot analysis
      Proteins were extracted from liquid nitrogen-ground Taxus stem tissues using extraction buffer [47] supplemented with 1% glycine [48] followed by SDS-PAGE on 12% acrylamide gels [49] and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane [50] followed by immunoblotting using a polyclonal anti-TS antibody [see Additional file
         9 for details].
      
   

