Methods
   
      This paper analyses data collected as part of a larger trial, the Health Improvement
         and Prevention Study (HIPS), the details of which have been published elsewhere 
         				[23].
      
      Recruitment
      The study was conducted in two rural and three urban Divisions of General Practice
         (Primary Care Organizations) in New South Wales (NSW) Australia. A total of 36 practices
         were invited to participate in the trial and 30 agreed to take part. Practices were
         randomly allocated to an ‘intervention’ (n = 16) or ‘control’ group (n = 14). Eligibility
         included having attended the practice in the previous 12&nbsp;months, being aged 40–55
         with hypertension and / or hyperlipedaemia or aged 56–64, and not being involved in
         other research. In each practice up to 160 eligible individuals were invited to participate
         by mail. Individuals were excluded if they had diabetes, cardiovascular disease, current
         severe illness, or were unable to speak adequate English or understand the consent
         form.
      
      Intervention
      General practitioners (GPs) and practice nurses from intervention practices were offered
         a three hour training session on lifestyle assessment and counselling including brief
         motivational interviewing supplemented with practice visits and educational resources.
         Participating individuals were invited to attend for a health check during which the
         GP and practice nurse provided brief lifestyle counselling based on the 5As model
         (ask, assess, advise, assist, and arrange) 
         					[25]. In intervention practices, providers were encouraged to refer high risk individuals
         (defined as one or more of the following: history of gestational diabetes, impaired
         glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glycaemia, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, body
         mass index &gt;28 or waist circumference &gt;102 cm in males or 88 cm in females, current
         smoker) to a LMP. The LMP was coordinated by trained Intervention Officers at local
         Primary Care Organizations. The program consisted of an initial visit with a dietitian
         or exercise physiologist, who conducted an assessment and negotiated individual dietary
         and physical activity goals with the participant and an individual review session
         with the same allied health professional following the group program. The group program,
         which was adapted from the group component of the “Counterweight Program – CHANGE” 
         					[26], consisted of four group sessions (1.5 hours each) over the first three months, and
         a further two follow up sessions at six and nine months. The group sessions included
         an educational and physical activity component (20–30 minutes of walking or resistance
         exercise) and were based on the use of self-management strategies (goal setting, self
         monitoring, developing practical skills and problem solving) to promote positive dietary
         and physical activity changes and weight loss. Between sessions participants were
         encouraged to keep a food and physical activity diary, use a pedometer and carry out
         home based physical activity. The program was offered out of business hours in some
         Divisions. Some urban Divisions also gave taxi vouchers to participants to provide
         transport to and from the sessions.
      
      Data collection
      This paper used a concurrent mixed methods approach 
         					[27], drawing on both quantitative and qualitative data to explore factors influencing
         attendance rates at the LMP. Data sources 
         					[23] included:
      
      1) Participant survey data
      2) Participant clinical audit data
      3) Practice questionnaire on capacity for preventive care
      4) Semi-structured interviews and journal notes from Intervention Officers
      5) Lifestyle modification program referral and attendance records
      Participant survey data
      Participating individuals completed a mailed survey at baseline, six and 12&nbsp;months.
         The survey was based on the NSW Health Survey 
         						[28] and previous research 
         						[29,30]. It included questions about: (1) practice attendance; (2) reported assessment and
         management of lifestyle risk factors (smoking, nutrition, alcohol, physical activity
         and weight) and satisfaction with intervention received; (3) attendances at other
         services as a result of referral from the practice or self-referral; (4) self-reported
         fruit and vegetable intake, smoking, physical activity and alcohol intake, and attempts
         to change these; (5) readiness for behaviour change (stage of change) for each lifestyle
         risk factor 
         						[31]; (6) The Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K-10), a ten item questionnaire measuring
         negative emotional states in the preceding four weeks 
         						[32], and demographic variables (age, gender, postcode of residence, education level,
         employment status, language spoken at home and country of birth).
      
      The 12&nbsp;month survey also included the Porter Novelli’s 10-item scale 
         						[33] which categorizes individuals into four distinct groups based on differences in degree
         of engagement in health enhancement (active versus passive) and degree of independence
         in health decision making (independent versus doctor dependent). Self-reported LMP
         attendance rates and reasons for non attendance were collected in the 12&nbsp;month survey.
      
      The postcode of residence for each participant was linked to the 2006 index of relative
         socio-economic advantage/disadvantage 
         						[34] for the area in which the participant lived. The index ranks geographical areas where
         a high proportion of people are relatively more, or less, disadvantaged taking into
         account income, education, occupation, wealth and living conditions. The index was
         linked to the participants’ postcode of residence using quintiles. A quintile number
         of one represented the lowest 20% of areas, up to the highest 20% of areas which were
         given a quintile number of five. For the purposes of analysis three categories were
         created: 1) most disadvantaged participants (quintiles one and two), 2) intermediate
         disadvantaged participants (quintile three) and 3) least disadvantaged participants
         (quintiles four and five).
      
      Participant clinical audit data
      GPs and practice nurses were requested to record participant weight, waist circumference
         and blood pressure at baseline and 12&nbsp;months. These data were then extracted from
         patient records by trained data collectors. Participants were asked to have a fasting
         blood test to assess their serum lipids (total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, triglycerides)
         and glucose at baseline and 12&nbsp;months and a copy of these results was sent directly
         to the study centre by the pathology company.
      
      Practice questionnaire on capacity for preventive care
      The practice manager or principal GP was asked to complete a questionnaire on practice
         capacity for preventive care. The questionnaire included questions on practice characteristics
         (location, size, employment of practice nurses), the use of education materials, staff
         roles and teamwork in preventive care as well as the use of written preventive care
         protocols and linkages between the practice and support services 
         						[35].
      
      Semi-structured interviews and journal notes from Intervention Officers
      All Intervention Officers (n = 5, two from rural and three from urban areas) were
         invited to participate in a semi-structured interview at the completion of the intervention.
         The interviews explored their experience of implementing the LMP, including the referral
         process, participant engagement and attendance, program content and process of delivery,
         participant outcomes and program sustainability. Interviews were carried out by a
         researcher not involved in the study. Interviews were conducted over the phone and
         recorded with participants’ permission and generally lasted between 20 and 45 minutes.
         Intervention Officers were also asked to keep a journal throughout the intervention
         period recording their reflections about the program.
      
      Lifestyle modification program referral and attendance records
      The Intervention Officers monitored and kept the records of GP referrals and attendance
         at the LMP. They were responsible for making initial contact with participants, scheduling
         the group program and individual allied health visits and monitoring participant attendance.
      
      Quantitative data analysis
      Referral and attendance data
      Data were initially subject to preliminary descriptive analysis using SPSS statistical
         software (version 20; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) to examine the frequency of attendance
         at the program. Individuals were then categorized according to their participation:
         as 1) non attender (did not attend any individual or group sessions), 2) low attender
         (attended less than half of all group/individual sessions) or 3) high attender (attended
         at least half of all individual/group sessions).
      
      Characteristics of high versus low or non attenders
      Univariate analysis was initially used to compare high attenders versus low/non attenders
         in terms of demographic characteristics, individuals health risk profile, health seeking
         behavior and readiness to change, degree of psychological distress, as well as previous
         GP intervention or referral for diet and physical activity. The characteristics of
         practices from which high and low/non attenders were referred were also compared.
         Significant differences in categorical variables for high and low/non attenders were
         examined using chi square statistic and independent samples t-test for normally distributed variables.
      
      Factors influencing attendance
      Variables found to be significant (p &lt; 0.05) in the univariate analysis were entered
         into a multivariate logistic regression model to examine the predictors of high attendance
         at the LMP. The data were then subject to multi-level logistic regression analysis
         to examine participant and practice factors associated with attendance levels. The
         multi-level analysis was considered appropriate as participant data for attendance
         was clustered by practice (ICC = 0.111). The intra class correlation (ICC) represents
         the degree to which participant data from the same practice are similar to one another
         compared with those of individuals from different practices. The high ICC values indicate
         that the analysis must account for the variance between practices, supporting the
         choice of multi-level analysis 
         						[36]. Multilevel logistic regression models were used with a dichotomous dependent variable
         (0 = non/low attendance, 1 = high attendance) adjusted for clustering of individuals
         (level 1) and within practices (level 2) 
         						[37]. Initially, we fitted a baseline variance component or empty model (no independent
         variables) followed by the model with individual and practice variables (Model 1).
         ICC was calculated using the latent variable method. The (standard) logistic distribution
         has variance π2/3 = 3.29 and hence this can be taken as the level 1 variance 
         						[34]. As both the level 1 and 2 variances are on the same scale, the following formula
         was used: ICC = (level 2 variance)/(level 2 variance + 3.29). All multi-level models
         were performed with MLwiN version 2.0. 
         						[37].
      
      Qualitative data analysis
      All interview data were transcribed verbatim and journal notes typed in a Word document.
         Factors influencing participant engagement and attendance at the LMP were then coded
         using NVivo 7.0 software [QSR 
         					[38] and key themes identified along with supportive quotes. All analysis was undertaken
         by one researcher (RL) with codes and themes discussed with the broader research team.
      
   

