Methods
   
      Data from the Scopus database were retrieved between Dec 2011 and Sept 2012 by using
         the SCImago portal [18]. Countries were organized into eight geographic regions: Western Europe, Eastern
         Europe, Africa (Central and Southern Africa), North America (US and Canada), Latin
         America (including the Caribbean), Middle East (Middle East and North Africa), Asia,
         and the Pacific region. These geographic regions were the same as those designated
         in SCImago, with the exception of North Africa and the Middle East, which were grouped
         together (as grouped by the World Health Organization), because of the low number
         of articles from African regions and because North African countries are closely aligned
         with Middle Eastern countries with regard to agriculture and cultural attitudes about
         animals [19].
      
      The most current journal data (2011) obtained for the subject area “Veterinary” included
         the SCImago Journal Rank (SJR) indicator, H-index, total and citable articles (last
         3 years), total citations (last 3 years), self-citations (last 3 years), citations/article
         (last 2 years), number of cited and uncited articles, years of coverage, country of
         publication, publisher, and subject category (food animal [FA], small animal [SA],
         equine [EQ], and miscellaneous [MISC]). The SJR is a prestige metric of journal impact
         based on the Scopus database that considers both the quantity of citations (average
         number of citations received in a specific year by documents published in the journal
         in the previous three years) and the quality of citations (based on the scientific
         influence of the journals that cite them) [20]. The SJR has been shown to be a good alternative to the impact factor for journal
         evaluation, although journal ranks differ, in part because the SJR restricts the inflationary
         effect of self-citations [20,21]. The journal rankings used in this study were based on the SJR. The number and country
         of publication of veterinary journals indexed in 1999 (for 1996 citation data), 2003,
         and 2007 were recorded to document changes in the database over time. The 2011 impact
         factors for veterinary journals indexed in Scopus were obtained from Journal Citation
         Reports [22]. The Directory of Open Access Journals was queried to ascertain which of the journals
         were open-access [23] Language of publication was determined by examining journal websites and instructions
         for authors and through indexers.
      
      Veterinary article data for regions and countries were obtained for the 14-year period
         1996–2010 combined and for 1996 and 2010 (the most recent year for which data were
         available) separately. Data included the H index (for countries), total and citable
         articles, citations, citations/article, self-citations, number of cited and uncited
         articles, and % of articles with international collaboration. Percent international
         collaboration was defined as the proportion of articles whose author affiliations
         included more than one country. Regional data were also obtained for each individual
         year between 1996 and 2010. The number and percentage of articles in species-specific
         journals was recorded for each country and region from 1996 to 2010 and for the entire
         period combined. World data were calculated manually from regional data.
      
      The following demographic and economic indicators were retrieved from the database
         of the World Bank [24]: gross domestic product (GDP; in current US$), gross national income (GNI; per capita,
         Atlas method, in current US$), agriculture value added (as a % of GDP), research and
         development (R&amp;D; % of GDP), total population, % urban population, and % rural population.
         “Agriculture, value added” corresponds to the net output of agricultural sectors (forestry,
         hunting, fishing, crop cultivation, and livestock production). “Research and development”
         includes current and capital expenditures on basic and applied research and experimental
         development. Data were obtained for 2010 for all variables except R&amp;D, for which 2009
         data were used (too few countries had data reported for 2010). Where data were not
         available in 2010 (or 2009 for R&amp;D), data from the most recent year available was
         used (but not earlier than 2000). The number of veterinary faculties in each country
         was obtained from the American Veterinary Medical Association [25] and the World Association of Veterinarians [26]. Where discrepancies occurred between sources, the highest number was used. The number
         of veterinary faculty per population and articles per population, GDP, and veterinary
         faculty were calculated.
      
      Co-citation maps were visualized in SCImago for all countries for which data were
         available between 1996–97 and 2009–10. The discipline to which veterinary medicine
         was directly linked by co-citations in each year was recorded. In addition, co-citation
         links between veterinary subject categories (FA, SA, EQ, MISC) and other subject categories
         were also visualized and recorded. Where subject categories were linked to more than
         one discipline, both disciplines were recorded. The strength of co-citation links
         was not determined.
      
      Data were collated and computations were done in Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA).
         Data were analyzed statistically using JMP (v. 10.0.0, SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA).
         Because most data were not normally distributed, median and range of values were reported.
         Principal component analysis was used to evaluate correlations among total articles,
         number and proportion of species-specific articles (using data from 1996–2010), and
         demographic and economic indicators. Statistical significance was set at P &lt; 0.05.
      
   

