Methods
   
      Cell culture and treatment
      Rat AR-5 amygdalar and IVB hypothalamic cell lines were used in this experiment. AR-5
         and IVB cells were cultured in phenol red-free DMEM/F12 media (Hyclone) supplemented
         with 10% newborn calf serum (NCS) (Gemini Bioproducts), 2&nbsp;mM&nbsp;L-glutamine, 1&nbsp;mM sodium
         pyruvate, 0.1&nbsp;mM nonessential amino acids, and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (all
         from Cellgro, Mediatech Inc.).
      
      For the microarray experiment, 105 cells were plated on Nunc 6-well plates (Nalge Nunc International). After 24&nbsp;hours,
         cells were washed with PBS (137&nbsp;mM NaCl, 2.7&nbsp;mM KCl, 4.3&nbsp;mM Na2HPO4 and 1.47&nbsp;mM KH2PO4; pH&nbsp;7.4) and maintained in media containing charcoal-stripped NCS for 48&nbsp;hours.
      
      RNA isolation
      Total RNA was extracted using Tri-reagent® (MRC Inc.) according to manufacturer’s
         protocol. Briefly, cells were suspended in 1&nbsp;mL of Tri-reagent and incubated at room
         temperature for 5&nbsp;minutes. Subsequently, 0.2&nbsp;mL of chloroform was added and the homogenate
         was shaken vigorously for 15&nbsp;seconds and incubated at room temperature for 10&nbsp;minutes.
         Samples were centrifuged at 12,000&nbsp;g for 15&nbsp;minutes at 4°C. The aqueous phase was
         then combined with equal volume of isopropanol, incubated at room temperature for
         10&nbsp;minutes and centrifuged at 12,000&nbsp;g for 15&nbsp;minutes at 4°C. The resulting RNA pellet
         was washed with 1&nbsp;mL of 75% ethanol, centrifuged (at 7500&nbsp;g, 5&nbsp;min, 4°C), air-dried
         for 10&nbsp;minutes and dissolved in 20&nbsp;μL of nuclease-free water (Sigma). The RNA concentration
         was measured using a Bio-tek plate reader, and RNA integrity was assessed using an
         Agilent2100 RNA nano-chip.
      
      Gene expression analysis
      Sample labeling, hybridization and data extraction was performed by the UTSW microarray
         core facility; the Affymetrix rat genome 230 2.0 array was used. ArrayStar (DNASTAR,
         Inc.) was used to obtain the gene list and compare the relative gene expression between
         the AR-5 and IVB cell lines. The experiment was performed in triplicate, and genes
         that were consistently expressed in the two cell lines at a 95% confidence level were
         analyzed further. A hierarchical clustering method was used to identify functional
         groups of genes that are abundant in each cell line.
      
      Measure of differential expression was calculated by setting the IVB expression levels
         as baseline and is expressed as fold difference. Genes expressed at 2-fold or greater
         were considered to be expressed at a higher level in the AR-5 and genes expressed
         at 0.5 fold or less were considered to be abundant in the IVBs.
      
      The gene expression data was combined with the information from the Gene Ontology
         (GO) database, using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery
         (DAVID) bioinformatics database [9,10]. DAVID is a functional annotation tool that allows the investigator to assign empirically
         determined biological functions to a large set of gene list. The GO database (a tool
         within DAVID) was used to identify biological processes associated with the genes
         in the 95% confidence level that met the 2-fold cutoff criteria. To search for reported
         physical and/or functional associations between the enriched protein coding genes,
         the data was analyzed using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins
         (STRING) database [11].
      
      Validation of microarray results by RTqPCR
      Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using the Verson cDNA kit (Thermo Fisher
         Scientific), following the manufacturer’s protocol with the following modifications.
         A 1&nbsp;μg sample of total RNA was used as the template, reverse gene specific primers
         were used and cDNA was synthesized at 47.8°C for 1&nbsp;hour. RTqPCR was performed using
         the BIORAD thermocycler to compare the expression levels of MT-CO1, MT-CO2, MT-CYB,
         MT-ND1, MT-ND2 and MT-ND3 between the two cell lines; 60S ribosomal protein L27a (RpL27a)
         was used as the reference gene. Primers used for each gene can be found in Table&nbsp;1.
      
      Table 1. List of primers used to verify the expression of 6 mitochondrial genes identified
            in the array
      The cycling parameters were: initial melting step at 95°C for 15&nbsp;sec, and amplification
         at 95°C for 5&nbsp;sec, then 60°C for 30&nbsp;sec. The amplification steps were repeated for
         a total of 40&nbsp;cycles.
      
      The ΔΔC(t) method was used to obtain the fold difference. The C(t) values for IVBs
         were used as the reference value and the data was normalized to RpL27a.
      
      Statistical analysis
      Three biological replicates were analyzed for each cell line. A statistical cutoff
         of 5% False Discovery Rate (FDR) was generated with a moderate t-test with Benjamini
         Hochberg multiple testing correction. A 2-fold cutoff was also applied to identify
         differentially expressed genes.
      
      For the RTqPCR data, the data represents the average of 11 biological replicates,
         the statistical significance was determined by performing one-tailed student’s t-test
         and p ≤ 0.05 was considered significant.
      
      To measure gene-enrichment in biological processes, Expression Analysis Systematic
         Explorer (EASE) score was used, which is a modified Fisher Exact p-value. An EASE
         score of &lt; 0.05 was used to identify significantly enriched GO terms.
      
   

