Methods
   
      Design
      We used in-depth interviews and grounded theory dimensional analysis to collect and
         analyze the data [21-23]. This inductive method was chosen so as to obtain a theoretical explanation by analyzing
         participants’ conceptualizations of quality of care. In the grounded theory paradigm,
         the theory is conceived as a collection of well-developed concepts linked by linking
         sentences which together constitute an integrated framework that can be used to explain
         or predict phenomena [22].
      
      Participants
      Data of this study come from a broader research project (Qualitative analysis of formal
         care in public nursing homes) that analyzes the phenomenon of institutionalization
         of older persons. The participants and methods have been described extensively elsewhere
         [24]. In brief, in-depth interviews were conducted using a theoretical sample of 20 persons
         living at a public nursing home in Talavera de la Reina (Spain), aged 65&nbsp;years and
         over, with no cognitive impairment; eight relatives of residents with cognitive impairment
         were also interviewed. Spain has 5393 nursing homes, classified by type of funding
         in public, private, or concerted. Currently, 26.6% of them are public funding facilities.
         These nursing homes provides supervision or assistance with activities of daily living,
         services of junior nursing staff, nurses, doctor, occupational therapist, speech therapist,
         social worker and recreational assistance. The study sample comes from a nursing home
         where 180 assisted and unassisted older people live. The residents pay 75% of their
         net income for their accommodation, and the allocation of staff and equipment is regulated
         by current Spanish legislation. In Spain, these types of institutions are generally
         standardized in terms of amenities and staff [25]. We used theoretical sampling during the process of data analysis, so that each new
         case was selected because he/she was particularly appropriate for clarifying relationships
         and logic among constructs. Sampling continued until the saturation of information
         had been reached, the point at which enlarging a sample ceases to furnish new analytical
         concepts [23,26]. Informants of both sexes, different age groups and sociodemographic characteristics
         were included (Tables&nbsp;1 and 2), in an effort to maximize opportunities to discover dissimilarities among concepts,
         and to make denser categories in terms of its properties and dimensions [22,27].
      
      Table 1. Sociodemographic characteristics of the sample: residents without cognitive impairment
            (n = 20)
      Table 2. Sociodemographic characteristics of the sample: residents with cognitive impairment
            (n=8)
      Inclusion criteria for informants were persons aged 65&nbsp;years and over, living at the
         nursing home for at least three months, the minimal estimated time to get an accurate
         picture of facilities, services and staff. Residents admitted on a temporary-stay
         basis were not considered eligible because short-term residents may have different
         needs and characteristics [1]. In the case of residents whose degree of cognitive impairment prevented them from
         directly participating in an interview (score higher than two on Pfeiffer’s Short
         Portable Mental Status Questionnaire) [28], the closest family member to the resident (proxy) was interviewed instead of him.
         Since such relatives were well acquainted with the personal history of the resident’s
         life, his/her habits and preferences, they were deemed more appropriate than professional
         caregivers in terms of understanding the resident’s views on quality.
      
      Data collection
      Interviews were held by appointment and were conducted into the nursing home in a
         peaceful and quiet place. Each interview started out with an open-ended question about
         the personal experience of care at nursing home, which elicited subjective responses
         about their perceptions. The interviewer, the main researcher, had a topic list that
         could emerge openly throughout the interviews, but not necessarily at each interview
         (Table&nbsp;3). This topic list was refined and concretized guided by theoretical sampling [23]. Interviews were conducted in 2010 and lasted 50 to 120&nbsp;minutes. All interviews were
         recorded using a digital recorder, rendered anonymous, and literally transcribed.
      
      Table 3. Interview topics list
      Ethical considerations
      The study was approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of Nuestra Señora
         del Prado Hospital, in Talavera de la Reina, Spain, and by the management of the nursing
         home where the study was undertaken. After a full explanation adapted to the research
         project, all participants were asked to give their informed consent to a sound recording
         of the interview and its subsequent analysis. In the case of residents with cognitive
         impairment, the consent of the proxy or, where applicable, the legal guardian was
         obtained.
      
      Data analysis
      After transcribing the in-depth interviews, the texts were collated and sorted. Using
         grounded theory methods, three qualitative methodology research experts drawn from
         different disciplines (Anthropology, Sociology and Nursing) analyzed the transcriptions,
         with the aim of ascertaining participants’ perception of overall health care quality
         and obtaining a theoretical explanation for this.
      
      Data-collection, analysis and interpretation were simultaneously undertaken in an
         interactive process, thus the results of the first data analysis informed subsequent
         data-collections, thereby enabling key topics to be studied in depth [23]. This implied constantly going back and forth among the interview transcriptions,
         the analytical memoranda (theoretical ideas about the codes and their relationships)
         and a review of the literature [27,29].
      
      According to grounded theory principles, our analysis identified specific concepts
         that explained how informants perceived overall quality of nursing home care. These
         concepts were labeled and classified into categories using open, axial and selective
         coding processes [29]. Firstly, each of the three persons in the analysis team separately performed an
         open coding process, labeling the concepts that emerged from the interviews and sorting
         these into categories. Once this individual coding had been completed, the process
         was then repeated on a joint basis and the previously identified categories reorganized.
         The analysis team shared their research notes and hypotheses, which helped them reach
         a consensus on new categories and hypotheses, and improve their comprehension of the
         texts. Finally, an axial and selective coding process was performed jointly. Thus,
         while open coding fractured the data in short units of significance, axial coding
         connected them into categories and subcategories in a hierarchical order, and finally
         selective coding integrated the categories to build a substantive theory. This theory
         described the relationship among a set of categories that emerged from the data through
         the constant comparative method [23].
      
      We used of the Atlas-Ti 5.0 software program as a technical aid in the coding stage,
         enabling to code large amounts of text and share the data among the research team.
      
      Rigour
      The validity and reliability of the conclusions of the analysis were ensured by the
         following: literal transcription of all interviews, analysis of the data in the full
         context of the interview during which they had surfaced, constant comparative method
         and triangulation methods [27,29]. We use triangulation methods to increase the validity and to mitigate biases in
         the study [30,31]. Thus, data were analyzed by three researchers from different disciplines who examined
         the phenomena from multiple lenses and possible theories. In addition, we performed
         data source triangulation conducting in-depth interviews with a theoretical sampling
         of residents and proxies of different ages, sex and sociodemographic characteristics
         [30,31].
      
   

