Methods
   
      Definition
      According to the Chinese Ministry of Health (MOHC) [24], “patient delay” is defined as a time interval of more than two weeks between the
         onset of TB symptoms and the patient’s first presentation to a health facility. The
         Ministry also defines “diagnostic delay” as a time interval of more than two weeks
         between a patient’s first visit to a health facility and the receipt of TB diagnosis.
      
      Search strategy
      The review was prepared following standard procedures of the Cochrane Collaboration
         [25] and the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
         statement and checklist [26] (see Additional file 1). To identify eligible studies on factors associated with TB patient and diagnostic
         delays published up to November 2012, three major databases, Medline/PubMed, EMBASE
         and CNKI (China National Knowledge Infrastructure), were searched. We used a mixture
         of free text and index terms to maximize retrieval of potentially relevant studies.
         The following terms were used for the PubMed search: “pulmonary tuberculosis and diagnostic
         delay in China”, “pulmonary tuberculosis and health system delay in China”, “pulmonary
         tuberculosis and detection delay in China”, “pulmonary tuberculosis and patient delay
         in China”, “pulmonary tuberculosis and health provider delay in China”, “pulmonary
         tuberculosis and doctor delay in China”, “pulmonary tuberculosis and identification
         delay in China”. Medline subject search terms included: “tuberculosis, pulmonary”[Mesh])
         AND “diagnosis”[Mesh]) AND “China”[Mesh] or “tuberculosis, pulmonary”[Mesh]) AND “patient
         acceptance of health care”[Mesh]) AND “China”[Mesh]. Searches in Medline/Pubmed were
         limited to full-text, humans, and English. The search terms used in EMBASE were ‘lung
         tuberculosis’/exp AND ‘early diagnosis’/exp AND ‘risk factor’/exp, ‘lung tuberculosis’/exp
         AND ‘patient’/exp AND ‘delayed diagnosis’/exp, ‘lung tuberculosis’/exp AND ‘delayed
         diagnosis’/exp AND ‘risk factor’/exp, ‘lung tuberculosis’/exp AND ‘patient’/exp AND
         ‘patient referral’/exp AND ‘risk factor’/exp, ‘lung tuberculosis’/exp AND ‘health
         care facility’/exp AND ‘patient referral’/exp AND ‘risk factor’/exp. CNKI is a key
         national e-publishing project that can be used for searching articles published in
         8,200 Chinese journals. It was utilized to search for articles in Chinese. The terms
         and concepts searched included “patient delay”, “diagnostic delay”, “risk factors
         for patient delay” and “risk factors for diagnostic delay”. We sought unpublished
         data from the gray literature through Google and Google Scholar searches. We also
         hand-searched reference lists of identified articles. Two reviewers (JE and YL) conducted
         the literature searches.
      
      Additional file 1. PRISMA checklist.
         	Format: DOC 
         	Size: 61KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Word Viewer
      Inclusion/exclusion criteria
      (1) Types of studies: Case-control, cross-sectional and cohort studies were included.
      (2) Participants: Patients with pulmonary tuberculosis (including smear positive or
         negative patients, newly diagnosed cases and those undergoing retreatment).
      
      (3) Exposure variables: We collected data on the following:
      (i) Demographic characteristics: marital status (classified as married or living with
         partner, single, widowed, divorced), age (grouped into 60 years and older, and less
         than 60 years old), education level (categorized into primary school and below, middle
         school and above), residence (categorized into rural and urban).
      
      (i) Risk behavior/lifestyle: smoking and alcohol consumption (categorized into smoker,
         non-smoker, alcohol drinker and non-drinker).
      
      (i) Health systems factors: health facilities (categorized into non-TB health facilities
         and TB health facilities), health resource related to TB diagnosis, ability of health
         providers and traffic or geographical barriers.
      
      (4) Outcomes measures: TB patient delay and TB diagnosis delay.
      When there was evidence of multiple publications of the same study over time, only
         the article with a full report was included. Reports on TB suspects, extra-pulmonary
         TB, HIV infected TB patients, qualitative studies (data collected by qualitative research
         methods) and studies that focus on PTB patients in Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan were
         excluded.
      
      Study selection
      Application of inclusion and exclusion criteria to identified studies was done by
         two reviewers (DL and YB). Both reviewers independently screened titles and abstracts
         of identified studies to assess their eligibility for inclusion in the review, using
         an eligibility form based on the inclusion criteria. Where there were disagreements
         regarding eligibility of studies, all reviewers participated in the decision about
         inclusion by discussion and consensus.
      
      Quality assessment
      We assessed the quality of case-control and cohort studies using the Newcastle-Ottawa
         Scale [27]. For case-control studies, we assessed the adequacy of case and control definition,
         representativeness of the cases, whether controls were derived from the same population
         as cases, comparability of cases and controls on the basis of design and analyses,
         ascertainment of exposure and non-response rates. For cohort studies, we assessed
         representativeness of the exposed cohort in the study setting, selection of non-exposed
         cohort, ascertainment of exposure, evidence that participants do not have outcome
         of interest at recruitment into the study, comparability of cohorts on the basis of
         design and analyses, outcome assessment and adequacy of follow-up [27]. After assessing the quality of each included study on the basis of these criteria,
         we assigned a composite quality score ranging from 0 (low) to 8 (high).
      
      For cross-sectional studies, we used the guideline for critical appraisal of cross-sectional
         studies developed by the National Collaborating Center for Environmental Health [28], which was adapted from a combination of items from the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale [27], the Critical Appraisal Skills Program [29], Critical Appraisals by Elwood [30], and Aschengrau and Seage III [31]. Specifically, we assessed representativeness of the study participants, methods
         for ascertaining exposure; comparability of exposure groups (including unexposed)
         in terms of age, sex, socioeconomic status and response bias; determination and validation
         of outcomes; internal validity; and how confounding factors were assessed and addressed.
         After reviewing the quality of each included study on the basis of these criteria,
         we assigned a composite quality score that ranged from 0 (low) to 4 (high). Two reviewers
         (YL and JE) assessed study quality and reached a consensus grade for each included
         study.
      
      Data abstraction
      Data from eligible studies were independently abstracted by two reviewers (BY and
         KL). Differences were resolved by consensus among all reviewers. Data extracted from
         each study included name of first author, year of publication, type of study design,
         place of study, type of participants (newly diagnosed/retreatment and smear positive/negative
         pulmonary TB patients), residence of participants (rural/urban), sampling size, outcome
         (patient delay/diagnostic delay), information used for comparing analyses (numbers
         of participants with/without exposure variables) and the main results were extracted
         for all included studies.
      
      Assessment of heterogeneity
      Heterogeneity was evaluated using the Q test [32] and the I-squared statistic (I2 = 100% × (Q-df)/Q) [33]. For the Q test, a P-value of 0.10 or less was considered statistically significant, indicating marked
         heterogeneity among studies. Where the P-value was ≤0.10, we calculated I2, and studies with heterogeneity levels of ≤50% were deemed acceptable. Where heterogeneity
         was more than 50%, we conducted subgroup analysis to explore possible reasons for
         the heterogeneity. For subgroup analyses, the heterogeneity within groups was also
         tested, using the same statistical methods.
      
      Data synthesis
      The first step of the data analysis involved a qualitative synthesis aimed at summarizing,
         comparing and contrasting the extracted data. Meta-analyses were then conducted to
         assess the association among patient delay, diagnostic delay, and gender, age, education,
         residence, healthcare seeking behaviors (TB health facility for first consultation
         or seeking care from Traditional Chinese Medicine (TMC) providers) and lifestyle factors
         (smoking and alcohol use). Only studies that adopted the definitions of patient and
         diagnostic delays proposed by the Office of TB Control in the MOHC [24] were included in the quantitative meta-analysis. We calculated pooled odds ratio
         (OR) separately for each factor, using RevMan 5.2 [25]. As noted earlier, we used the fixed effect model where the level of heterogeneity
         was acceptable (that is, P = &gt;0.10, or P = ≤0.10, but I2 = ≤50%), and the random effects model was used where there was significant heterogeneity
         (that is, P = ≤0.10, but I2 = &gt;50%). We assessed sources of heterogeneity by conducting sub-group analyses.
      
   

