Methods
   
      Participants
      Research ethics approval was obtained from the South and West Multicentre Research
         Ethics Committee (MREC/98/6/71) and Queens University Belfast Research Ethics Committee,
         and written informed consent obtained prior to participation. All recruited individuals
         were white, had type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) diagnosed before 32 years of age and
         were born in the UK or Ireland. Cases with nephropathy (n = 718) and controls without
         nephropathy (n = 749) were from the Warren 3/UK Genetics of Kidneys in Diabetes (GoKinD)
         and all-Ireland collections 
         					[23]. The definition of DN in cases was based on development of persistent proteinuria
         (&gt;0.5g protein/24h) at least 10 years after diagnosis of T1D, hypertension (blood
         pressure &gt; 135/85 mmHg or treatment with antihypertensive agents) and associated diabetic
         retinopathy. Controls were individuals with T1D for at least 15 years with normal
         urinary albumin excretion rates and no evidence of microalbuminuria on repeated testing
         (at least 3 assays measuring albumin excretion over a minimum 12 month period, with
         each test separated by at least 3 months). In addition, control subjects had not been
         prescribed antihypertensive drug treatment avoiding possible misclassification of
         diabetic individuals with nephropathy as ‘control phenotypes’ when the use of antihypertensive
         treatment may have reduced urinary albumin excretion into the normal range. Individuals
         with micro-albuminuria were excluded from both case and control groups since it is
         not possible to confidently assign a case or control status to such individuals as
         their urinary albumin excretion may either regress or progress over time 
         					[24].
      
      Haplotype definition, SNP selection and genotyping
      A total of 11 genes (AXIN1, CALM3, CTNNB1, DAAM1, DKK2, GSK3B, NFAT5, WNT3, WNT5A, WNT6 and WNT16) were chosen for genotyping (Table&nbsp;
         					1). SNPs were selected from within these 11 genes to tag common haplotypes (&gt;5% frequency
         within the HapMap CEU population). Haplotypes for each gene investigated were selected
         from Phase III, release 2 HapMap (http://www.hapmap.org webcite) CEPH data (Utah residents with ancestry in northern and western Europe; CEU) using
         Haploview (http://www.broadinstitute.org/haploview webcite) to visualise common haplotypes. Haplotypes were defined using the confidence interval
         method in Haploview as described in Gabriel et al. 
         					[25]. Adjacent haplotypes that had a multi-allelic D-prime of greater 0.9 were combined
         in an iterative fashion. SNPs were selected using multi-marker tagging for their ability
         to tag unique haplotypes with r2 &gt; 0.8 (LOD threshold 3.0). All SNPs had a minor allele frequency (MAF) ≥5%, with
         quality control filters of genotype call rate ≥95%, and no deviation from Hardy–Weinberg
         equilibrium (HWE; P &lt; 0.001).
      
      Genotyping was performed by MassARRAY iPLEX (Sequenom, San Diego, CA, USA) or Taqman
         5' nuclease (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) assays according to the manufacturers’
         instructions. DNA samples were excluded if missing genotypes exceeded 10%. Other quality
         control measures included parent/offspring trio samples, duplicates on plates, random
         sample allocation to plates, independent scoring of problematic genotypes by two individuals
         and re-sequencing of selected DNAs to validate genotypes.
      
      Statistical analysis
      Clinical characteristics of cases and controls were compared using the z-test for
         large independent samples and the χ2 test. Association analyses were performed using PLINK 
         					[26]. Initially a χ2 test for trend (1 df) was used with adjustment for collection centre. Logistic regression analysis was
         then performed on each SNP with terms for potential confounders (collection centre,
         gender, duration of T1D and HbA1c) included in the model. The level of statistical
         significance was set at 5% with correction for multiple testing performed by permutation
         test (n = 100,000). Pairwise interactions between SNPs were tested in the statistical
         programming package R, using logistic regression to compare models with and without
         the interaction terms to obtain a likelihood ratio test. The results of the interaction
         analysis were corrected for multiple testing by false discovery rate (FDR &lt; 5%).
      
   

