Methods
   
      Study description
      The Rakai Community Cohort Study (RCCS) has been described previously [22]. In brief, the Rakai cohort was established in 1994 for a community randomized trial
         of the control of sexually transmitted diseases (STD) for prevention of HIV (1994-99),
         and continued annual surveillance thereafter (1999 to-date). The RCCS was conducted
         in selected study communities that were originally mapped for the STD trial [22], and households within these communities were included in the RCCS. At household
         level, all consenting adults aged 15-49&nbsp;years were invited to participate in an interview.
         Prior to each study visit; a household census was conducted in the 50 study communities
         to update information on the current residents and to identify eligible persons aged
         15-49&nbsp;years. Participants completed an extensive socio-demographic (age, sex, education,
         religious affiliation, and type of union, i.e. monogamous or polygamous) and behavioral
         (engagement in extra-marital relations, lifetime number of sexual partners, prior
         HIV testing and receipt of HIV test results, ever use of condoms, and HIV risk perception)
         interviews, administered by trained same-sex interviewers. Venous blood was collected
         for HIV and STD diagnoses. Serologic diagnosis of HIV was based on two enzyme immunosorbent
         assays (EIA) (Vironostika HIV; Organon Teknika, Charlotte, North Carolina and Cambridge
         Biotech, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA) with Western blot confirmation of sero-discordant
         EIA results and recent HIV sero-converters (HIV WB; Bio-Merieux-Vitek, St Louis, Missiouri,
         USA).
      
      The Rakai HCT program
      The Rakai HCT program has been described elsewhere [23]. Briefly, all individuals who provided a blood sample at each survey round were asked
         if they were interested in receiving their HIV test results, and if they were, they
         were asked if they preferred to receive them together as a couple or individually.
         On average, HIV test results were available within 1&nbsp;month from the time of interview
         and blood draw (rapid HIV testing was not performed). Individuals had the option of
         receiving their test results and counseling at home (&gt;95% of couples chose to receive
         HCT at home) or at another venue of their choice. A community-resident HIV counselor
         (employed by Rakai Health Sciences Program) visited homes of those interested in receiving
         their HIV test results and provided individual or couples’ HCT based on the couples’
         preference. Individuals had the option of declining to receive their HIV test results,
         despite having initially requested to receive their results, or to receive individual
         HCT even though they had initially requested to receive them as a couple or the other
         way round. For each HCT session completed, HIV test counselors completed relevant
         HCT forms and returned them to the main field office in Kalisizo for entry into the
         main RCCS database. The HCT forms had provisions for couples that had refused to receive
         their HIV test results and those who could not be traced in the community either because
         they out-migrated from the study communities or died between the time of the interview
         and the delivery of the HIV test results. Individuals who tested HIV-positive were
         referred to HIV care clinics that exist within the study communities. The clinics,
         which were established by the Rakai Health Sciences Program, offer antiretroviral
         therapy, treatment for sexually transmitted infections and other opportunistic infections,
         prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV (PMTCT) services, among others.
      
      The Rakai Health Sciences Program employed trained and certified HIV counselors who
         were responsible for providing HCT to interested participants. HIV counselors received
         training in how to conduct couples’ HIV counseling and testing, including how to support
         HIV-discordant couples, from Ministry of Health trainers. Counselors were also trained
         in survey research methods to collect basic information about the clients served.
         The study employed HIV counselors who had been involved in the provision of HCT services
         in prior studies within the same cohort, so they had the experience needed to provide
         HCT services to couples and individuals.
      
      HIV test results were provided verbally in a private face-to-face setting in order
         to ensure privacy and reduce social harm. During the post-test counseling, all study
         participants were provided with HIV risk-reduction education including faithfulness
         to one’s spouse (“Be faithful”), and condom use, in line with the National HIV and
         AIDS Strategic Plan [24]. Information was also provided on couples’ counseling services available, HIV status
         disclosure, marital stability, nutrition and social support. Participants receiving
         HCT were helped to assess their own risk for HIV infection and/or transmission and
         how to reduce this risk. Participants who received individual HCT were encouraged
         to disclose their HIV test results to their partners, but no involuntary disclosure
         of HIV status was done since it is not permissible under the National HIV Counseling
         and Testing Policy [25].
      
      Measures
      As part of the RCCS interviews, participants were asked if they were currently married;
         the number of marital partners they had and partner identifying information, such
         as name, household or community of residence, was collected. This information was
         necessary for linking married individuals to their marital partners at the time of
         analysis. Married individuals were categorized as being in ‘monogamous relationships’
         if they reported only one marital partner or in ‘polygamous relationships’ if they
         reported more than one marital partner. The definition of a ‘polygamous relationship’
         was restricted to the number of marital partners reported by the male partner, since
         women are culturally not expected to have more than one husband. We used a generic
         sense of the term “marriage” to encompass all forms of marriage, including cohabitation,
         those married in church/mosque, and those in traditional and civil marriages. At each
         visit, married individuals were interviewed separately but at the time of analysis,
         these individuals were retrospectively linked to their marital partners to form couples,
         using study identifiers.
      
      A separate couples’ dataset was created for this analysis consisting of HIV status
         and HCT data as well as information on background socio-demographic and risk behavioral
         characteristics for married individuals enrolled into the RCCS between 2003 and 2009.
         Couples in the dataset were considered to be concordant HIV-negative if both partners
         were HIV-negative (designated as M-F- in this article), concordant HIV-positive if
         both partners were HIV-positive (M+F+), and HIV-discordant if one of the partners
         – but not both – was infected with HIV (M-F+ or M+ F-). Uptake of individual HCT was
         defined as the proportion of couples at each study visit in which one or both members
         had received individual HCT, and uptake of couples’ HCT was defined as the proportion
         of couples at each study visit who received HCT, including disclosure of test results,
         as a couple. Condom use was assessed as use of condoms with any sexual partner in
         the twelve months preceding the survey, and was coded as Yes = 1 and No = 2. HIV risk
         perception was categorized as ‘very likely’, ‘somewhat likely’, ‘not likely at all’
         or ‘unsure’. The question on HIV risk perception was administered to all participants
         regardless of their current HIV status, i.e. including those who had previously tested
         HIV-positive, since interviewers did not know the participants’ HIV status at the
         time of interview.
      
      For all married individuals in the couples’ dataset, we examined whether they had
         ever received HCT or disclosed their HIV status to their sexual partners. This question
         was asked of participants regarding their behaviors prior to 2003/04 and also in between
         each subsequent RCCS study visit. Assessing prior HCT and disclosure experiences was
         important because evidence from the Rakai cohort [23] as well as from elsewhere [26] shows that prior receipt of HCT can influence future participation in HCT, including
         couples’ HCT. In order to identify individuals with prior HCT or HIV status disclosure
         experience, we linked all individuals in the couples’ dataset to the main RCCS database
         and checked if one or both partners had received HCT or disclosed their HIV status
         to their marital partners in the RCCS study visits preceding the current visit. If
         evidence of prior receipt of HCT was available (regardless of whether one or both
         partners had ever received HCT), this was categorized as “prior HCT” in the couples’
         dataset. Similarly, if evidence of prior HIV status disclosure was available (i.e.
         ever disclosed to any sexual partner, including the current partner), this was categorized
         as “prior HIV status disclosure” in the couples’ dataset.
      
      Statistical analysis
      We conducted cross-sectional analyses to assess trends in HIV counseling and testing
         uptake among 21,798 who participated in four study visits of the Rakai Community Cohort
         Study between 2003 and 2009 (2003/04; 2005/06; 2006/08; and 2008/09). Couples with
         complete data were then categorized into those in whom (i) both members had never
         received HCT (i.e. never tested for HIV), (ii) one or both members had ever received
         HCT individually, or (iii) both partners had ever received HCT together (i.e., couples’
         HCT). Couples were considered to have ever received couples’ HCT if both partners
         received HCT together in the same sitting, or if the couples were assisted to disclose
         each other’s HIV test results by a program counselor (i.e. counselor-assisted disclosure).
         Couples with self-reported HIV status disclosure were excluded from the estimation
         of couples’ HCT uptake since it was not possible to verify these self-reports. Uptake
         of couples’ HCT in polygamous relationships was ascertained separately for each husband-wife
         pair, while keeping the husband constant in each pair. We computed the proportion
         of couples that had never received HCT, those that had ever received HCT separately
         and those that had ever received HCT together – overall and by socio-demographic (age,
         sex, education, religious affiliation and type of union) and risk behavioral (ever
         use of condoms, lifetime number of sexual partners, engagement in extra-marital relationship,
         and HIV risk perception) characteristics. We conducted χ2 tests to assess time trends in HCT uptake for the entire sample and multinomial logistic
         regression to assess relative risk ratios (RRR) of HCT uptake among a sub-sample 0f
         10,712 married individuals who had participated in the RCCS for at least three study
         visits. The decision on the number of participants to include in the sub-group analysis
         was based on the need to examine predictors of HCT uptake in individuals who had had
         a long period of exposure to HCT. The multinomial logistic regression analysis included
         socio-demographic (age-group, gender and level of education) and behavioral characteristics
         (extra-marital relations, prior HCT, and couple HIV status) that were found significant
         (P &lt; 0.05) at the bivariate analysis level. Since the primary outcome of the study is
         uptake of HCT, we used ‘never tested’ as the base outcome. All analyses were adjusted
         for repeated measures on the same individuals and number of times an individual participated
         in the study, using robust standard errors. A two-sided p-value of 0.05 or less was
         regarded as significant. Statistical analyses were done using STATA statistical software,
         Release 11.0 (College Station, TX: STATA Corporation).
      
      Ethics statement
      The RCCS and the subsequent HCT services were approved by ethics committees at the
         Uganda Virus Research Institute in Uganda and the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
         Public Health in the United States of America.
      
   

