Methods
   
      Ethics statement
      Our experiment was conducted in accordance with the French national regulations for
         human care and use of animals in research. Blood samples were collected on large-white
         pigs from UMR INRA Toxalim under the experimentation agreement number TOXCOM/0020/PP
         IO for the collection of blood samples.
      
      Neutrophil isolation and activation
      Neutrophils were isolated from freshly drawn venous blood of 7 to 9&nbsp;month-old healthy
         pigs as described previously [33]. Briefly, after density gradient centrifugation (1.077&nbsp;g/l, Lymphoprep, Eurobio),
         the pellet containing the neutrophils was submitted to a lysis solution (NH4Cl 0.15&nbsp;M – KHCO3 0.01&nbsp;M EDTA Na2 1&nbsp;μM) at room temperature for 10&nbsp;min to eliminate the red cells. The cell suspension
         was then centrifuged at 300&nbsp;g for 20&nbsp;min and the pellet was resuspended in 1&nbsp;ml of
         RPMI 1640. Purity of cell population was estimated at 90% by microscopic examination
         of May-Grünwald Giemsa (Sigma-Aldrich) stained blood smears and cell viability was
         found to be greater than 95% by a Trypan blue dye exclusion test. The neutrophil sample
         was divided in two: one part was directly used for spreading on slides (resting neutrophils)
         and the other part (adjusted at 7 × 106 cells/mL) was incubated by shaking with LPS (10&nbsp;μg/mL for 3&nbsp;h at 37°C) to produce
         the LPS-stimulated batch. The cells were spread on slides as described previously
         [33].
      
      DNA probes
      Subtelomeric probes were selected using recent data from the pig genome sequencing
         project (http://pre.ensembl.org/Sus_scrofa_map/Location/Genome webcite). Each probe consisted of: (1) 2 BACs specific to the p or q telomeric regions of a chromosome pair, (2) 4 different pools of BACs specific to the p or q telomeric regions of submetacentric
         chromosomes (SSC1 to SSC5), subtelocentric chromosomes (SSC6 and SSC7), metacentric
         chromosomes (SSC8 to SSC12) and finally telocentric chromosomes (SSC13 to SSC18).
         These BAC clones were obtained from the Biological Resources Centre – GADIE (http://www.crb-gadie.inra.fr webcite). All the BACs used in this study were presented in Additional file 1: Table S1. For each chromosome, p (probe 1) and q (probe 2) telomeric BACs were combined.
         Probes 1 and 2 were previously labelled by random priming by incorporation of dUTP
         Alexa 568 and dUTP Alexa 488 respectively, using the Bioprime DNA labelling kit (Invitrogen).
         Similarly, the 4 pools of p and q telomeric probes were labelled by incorporation
         of dUTP Alexa 568 and dUTP Alexa 488 respectively. Products from the reaction were
         precipitated with porcine Cot-1 DNA (Applied Genetics Laboratories, Melbourne, USA)
         and salmon sperm DNA (Eurobio). Each probe was dropped onto slides at a final concentration
         of 100&nbsp;ng/μL in a hybridization buffer (Sigma-Aldrich).
      
      Chromosome specific painting probes from flow-sorted chromosomes [50] were individually labelled by random priming with Biotin (Invitrogen) and combined
         with the appropriate subtelomeric probes. Biotin was revealed by streptavidin conjugated
         to Alexa 633 (Invitrogen). The specificity of all probes was tested by 2D FISH on
         porcine metaphases prepared from lymphocytes according to protocols which had previously
         been described [51] (Additional file 2: Figures S1a-g).
      
      3D-FISH experiments
      3D FISH experiments were carried out according to [33]. Briefly, after permeabilization of the neutrophils and RNAse A treatment, cells
         and probes were simultaneously heat-denatured at 75°C for 8&nbsp;min and then incubated
         for 72&nbsp;h at 37°C. The entire procedure was carried out in a DAKO hybridizer. Post-hybridization
         washes were performed first in 2 × SSC at room temperature (twice) for 15&nbsp;min, then
         three times for 15&nbsp;min each in 2 × SSC 50% formamide pH&nbsp;7.0 at 45°C, and finally three
         times for 15&nbsp;min each in 0.1 × SSC at 50°C. Nuclei were counterstained with 4',6'diamidino-2-phenylindole
         (DAPI) in Vectashield medium (Vector Laboratories). For the visualization of the nuclear
         membrane, the samples were incubated with an anti-lamin B antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
         at 1:50 dilution in PBS containing 2% serum albumin for 1&nbsp;h at room temperature and
         incubated with an anti-goat Alexa 488 secondary antibody (Invitrogen).
      
      Confocal microscopy and image analyses
      Confocal microscopy was carried out using a Leica TCS SP2 confocal microscope (Leica
         Instruments) equipped with an oil immersion objective (plan achromatic 63× N.A. = 1.4).
         The Z-stacks were acquired at 1024 × 1024 pixels per frame using an 8-bit pixel depth
         for each channel at a constant voxel size of 0.093 × 0.093 × 0.244&nbsp;μm. Typically,
         a stack of 45 confocal planes was acquired. Segmentations and 3D measurements between
         objects (3D distances between nucleus outer border and subtelomeric probe centres,
         or between subtelomeric probe centres) were performed using NEMO software [42]. The nucleus segmentation was validated by labelling the nuclear membrane with anti-lamin
         B (Additional file 3: Figure S2) and more generally, the segmentation for each cell (nucleus and objects)
         was validated by manual comparisons with the raw images.
      
      Telomere associations
      Telomeres were defined as associated if the 3D distance between their spot centres
         was inferior to 2 × r, r being the spot radius. We determined for each chromosome
         pair how many nuclei were in each conformation (denoted C1 to C14 – Additional file
         8: Figure S4a). Then we calculated the number of associations and non-association events
         for each type of telomeric association considering that there are 6 possibilities
         (1&nbsp;pp, 1 qq, 2 pqloop and 2 pqcross) (Additional file 8: Figure S4b).
      
      Additional file 8: Figure S4. Estimation of the number of events (telomeric associations) that can occur in a neutrophil
         nucleus.
         	Format: DOCX 
         	Size: 130KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Statistical analyses
      Distance of the p and q telomeres from the nuclear outer border
      Pairwise comparisons of the average values (border-to-border distances between the
         spot and the outer nuclear periphery) over the two cell populations (resting and activated
         neutrophils) were carried out using the Mann–Whitney Wilcoxon test R software, [52]. Similarly in each state, the positions of the p and q telomeres were compared using
         the same statistical test.
      
      Test on random association between p and q telomeres
      For each chromosome, the distribution of pp, qq, pqloop and pqcross associations observed
         was compared to the theoretical distribution (p) expected if these associations occur at random and independently (p (pp or qq) = 1/6; p (pqloop or pqcross) = 1/3) using a χ2 test. p values &lt;0.05 were considered as significant.
      
      Frequency of telomeric associations
      To determine the frequency at which a telomeric association occurs, we estimated a
         probability of association for each type (pp, qq, pqloop or pqcross) as follows:
      
      Probability of pp association ppp :
      
      ppp = Number of pp associations / (Number of pp associations + Number of 0&nbsp;pp association)
      
      and similarly for pqq, ppqloop and ppqcross (Additional file 8: Figure S4a).
      
      This estimation derives from the following binomial model. With Xc,t,s,i denoting the number of telomeric associations observed in the nucleus (i), in the
         state (s) (activated/not activated), of the type t (pp, qq, pqloop, pqcross) and the chromosome c, and Nc,t,s,i the associated maximum number of such associations, we stated that Xc,t,s,i follows a binomial distribution: Xc,t,s,i ~ Bin(Nc,t,s,i , pc,t,s,i ). In order to estimate and test the existence of an effect of different factors
         such as LPS-activation, chromosomal association level and association type, we fitted
         the binomial regressions with the following covariates (X stands for interaction)
         and applied a step by step procedure:
      
      Model 1: chromosome + type + state + chromosome X type + chromosome X state X type
      Model 2: chromosome + type + state + chromosome X type
      Model 3: chromosome + type
      Model 4: chromosome + state
      Model 5: chromosome
      Model 6: constant
      The fit of these nested models was compared using a χ2 test.
      
      As a complement, we conducted a Principal Component Analysis on the observed relative
         frequencies of the number of telomeric associations observed, sorted by type.
      
   

