Methods
   
      Identification of MKK and MPK genes in B. napus
      BnaMKK and BnaMPK gene identification was performed essentially as described previously [44]. Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) representing MKK and MPK genes were retrieved by
         BLAST searching the NCBI dbEST database (release 110101) using 10 AtMKKs and 20 AtMPKs as the queries, respectively. Only hits with e-values lower than 10-4 were retrieved. Altogether we obtained 18 and 84 unique ESTs representing BnaMKKs and BnaMPKs, respectively. These ESTs were further cleaned, clustered, and assembled and, each
         of the resultant contigs and singlets were reciprocally BLAST-searched against Arabidopsis
         to find the best hit, which we designated as the putative ortholog. Subsequently,
         the amino acids were predicted using open reading frames (ORFs) in DNASTAR (DNASTAR
         Inc.). At this step, we identified the cDNA (mRNA) sequences of a total of eight BnaMKK and 18 BnaMPK.
      
      Plant growth and gene cloning
      Wild type canola (DH12075) plants were grown in Pindstrup soil mix (Egypt) in a glasshouse
         with a photoperiod of 16&nbsp;h light (T5 fluorescent tubes with a light intensity of approximately
         90 μE m-2&nbsp;s-1)/8&nbsp;h dark, and a temperature of 22°C for 7 d. RNA was isolated from seedlings using
         a Plant RNA kit (Omega Bio-Tek, USA). RNA integrity was checked by electrophoresis
         on an agarose gel and quantified using the NanoDrop 1000 (NanoDrop Technologies, Inc.,
         USA). First-strand cDNA was synthesized from 2.5&nbsp;μg of total RNA using RevertAid H
         minus reverse transcriptase (Fermentas) and oligo(dT)18 primers (Fermentas). PCR primers
         were designed using PrimerSelect (DNAStar Inc.) or Primer 3 (v0.4.0, http://frodo.wi.mit.edu/ webcite) (Additional file 9: Table S4). PCR was conducted in a 50&nbsp;μL final volume including 0.5&nbsp;μL of cDNA template,
         1 × Pfu buffer, 200&nbsp;μM deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) (Promega), 400 nM of each primer,
         and 1 unit of Pfu polymerase. The PCR conditions included an initial denaturation at 94°C for 3&nbsp;min,
         followed by 35&nbsp;cycles of 94°C for 30&nbsp;s, 50°C for 30&nbsp;s, 72°C for 1&nbsp;min per kb, with
         a final extension at 72°C for 8&nbsp;min. RACE (rapid amplification of cDNA end) was performed
         as described [44]. PCR products were gel purified using the BioSpin Gel Extraction Kit (Bioer Technology
         Co., Ltd) and cloned into pJET1.2 vector supplied with the CloneJET PCR cloning kit
         (Fermentas) and sequenced from the two ends using BigDye reagent in ABI3700 sequencer
         (Applied BioSystems).
      
      Additional file 9: Table S4. Primers used in this study.
         	Format: XLS 
         	Size: 33KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Excel Viewer
      Phylogenetic tree construction and bioinformatics
      The MKKs and MAPKs/MPKs of Arabidopsis and rice (Oryza sativa subsp. japonica) were downloaded from TAIR10 (http://www.arabidopsis.org webcite) and the rice genome annotation project http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/annotation_community_families.shtml webcite[1], respectively. To identify MKKs and MAPKs from other species, we first aligned the amino acid sequences of 10 AtMKKs and 20
         AtMPKs and generated a hidden Markov model (HMM) for each. Next we performed an HMM-based
         search (http://hmmer.janelia.org/ webcite) [83], for similar peptide sequences in the sequenced genomes as presented in Phytozome
         v9.0 (http://www.phytozome.net/ webcite) and also by keyword search in the NCBI database. After that, each retrieved sequence
         was examined for the conserved MKK and MAPK signature motif sequences. The species
         searched include Brachypodium distachyon (Bd); Capsicum annuum (Ca); Chlamydomonas reinhartdii (Cr); Euphorbia esula (Ee); Gossypium hirsutum (Gh); Glycine max (Gm); Hordeum vulgare (Hv); Ipomoea batatas (Lb); Malus micromalus (Mm); Medicago sativa (Ms); Nicotiana tabacum (Nb); Ostreococcus tauri (Ot); Petroselinum crispum (Pc); Physcomitrella patens (Pp); Pisum sativum (Ps); Populus trichocarpa (Pt); Ricinus communis (Rc); Selaginella moellendorffii (Sm); Sorghum bicolor (Sb); Solanum lycopersicum (Sl); Saccharum officinarum (So); Solanum tuberosum (St); Triticum aestivum (Ta); Vitis vinifera (Vv) and Zea mays (Zm).
      
      The phylogenetic trees of both MKKs and MPKs across various species were produced
         as described previously [44]. First, the predicted amino acid sequences of MKKs or MPKs were aligned using ClustalX1.83.
         Then, by using the maximum parsimony (MP) algorithm implemented in MEGA5.1 [84], the bootstrap consensus trees were inferred from 500 replicates to represent the
         inferred evolutionary history. The amino acid sequences of MKKs or MPKs from a variety
         of species retrieved from online databases were also identified for the reconstruction
         of the phylogenetic trees.
      
      We analyzed the predicted candidate proteins of BnaMKK and BnaMPK gene families using
         MEME 4.9.0 (Release date: Wed Oct 3 11:07:26 EST 2012) with the parameters as described
         previously [47,85]. The maximum number of motifs was set to 10 and the optimum motif width was 6 to
         50. For prediction of transactivation domain (TAD) of transcription factors, a 9aa
         TAD prediction program was used (http://www.at.embnet.org/toolbox/9aatad webcite).
      
      Subcellular localization and confocal microscopy
      The coding regions (CDSs) of BnaMKK2, -3, -4 and BnaMPK-3, -5, -6, and -9, were amplified by RT-PCR from the cDNA of canola with primers listed (Additional
         File 9: Table S4). Both pCsGFPBT (GenBank: DQ370426) binary vector and a modified version,
         pYJGFP with a Gly-Ala rich peptide linker between CDS and sGFP were used in this study
         [67]. The modified GFP vector, pYJGFP was made by insertion of multiple cloning sites
         at Nco I site and sequenced to confirm that it was in-frame. These vectors and BnaMKK or BnaMPK products were digested with corresponding restriction enzymes (Ferments), purified
         (Bioer) and ligated by T4 DNA ligase (Fermentas) before transformed into DH5α. After confirmed by sequencing,
         these constructs and p19 protein of tomato bushy stunt virus were transferred into
         Agrobacterium tumefaciens GV3101 for infiltrating into the leaves of N. benthamiana[86]. P19 can suppress gene silencing in transformed tobacco leaves. AS-media (for 100&nbsp;ml,
         1&nbsp;ml of 1&nbsp;M MES-KOH, pH&nbsp;5.6, 333&nbsp;μl of 3&nbsp;M MgCl2, 100&nbsp;μl of 150&nbsp;mM acetosyringon [in DMSO, stored in aliquots at -20°C]) was freshly
         made to resuspend transformed agrobacteria. One mililiter of the culture was taken
         by sterile single-use syringes to inject into the abaxial air space of tobacco leaves.
         The leaf section near the injection site was taken and 500&nbsp;mM mannitol was used to
         treat leaves section for one hour at room temperature to separate the cell wall and
         protoplast. Observation of GFP signal was performed under a confocal microscope LSM510beta
         (Carl Zeiss).
      
      Fungal pathogen inoculation and stress treatments
      Wild type canola plants were grown in a greenhouse with a photoperiod of 16&nbsp;h light
         /8&nbsp;h dark for 18 d. S. sclerotiorum (SX09-904) was a gift provided by Prof. Lili Huang (Northwest A &amp; F University) and
         was cultured on Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) mdium. Agar plugs from the front edge of
         mycelia were used to inoculate the first and the second true leaves with wounding.
         Leaves inoculated with agar plugs without mycelia were used as mock control. Tissues
         were harvested at 6 and 24&nbsp;h post inoculation (hpi) and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen
         before stored at -80°C. Jasmonic acid (JA, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), SA (Sigma-Aldrich,
         USA), Paraquat (MV, Sigma-Aldrich), abscisic acid ((±)-ABA, Invitrogen, USA), 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic
         acid (ACC, Sigma-Aldrich), oxalic acid (OA, Sigma-Aldrich) were sprayed onto the leaves
         with a concentration of 100&nbsp;μM for JA, 2&nbsp;mM for SA, 50&nbsp;μM for ABA, 25&nbsp;μM for ACC,
         10&nbsp;μM for Paraquat and 40&nbsp;mM for OA. The preparation of stock solution of JA, SA,
         and ACC followed our previous procedures [44], while OA was prepared as a 40&nbsp;mM stock solution as described in [87]. The whole process was repeated three times at independently time and thus three
         biological replicates were prepared.
      
      Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
      The quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed as described earlier
         [44] with modifications. Total RNA samples were isolated from treated and non-treated
         canola leaves using Plant RNA kit (Omega, USA), quantified by NanoDrop (NanoDrop Technologies,
         Inc.) with the integrity checked on 1% (w/v) agarose gel. RNA samples were transcribed
         into cDNAs by using RevertAid H minus reverse transcriptase (Fermentas,) and oligo(dT)18 primers (Fermentas). Primers used for qRT-PCR were designed using PrimerSelect program
         of DNASTAR (DNASTAR Inc.) targeting 3’UTR of each genes with amplicon sizes of 75-250&nbsp;bp
         (Additional file 9: Table S4). Each primer was reciprocally BLAST against the B. napus database in NCBI to eliminate cross-amplification. Primer specificity and amplification
         efficiency were further checked by running standard curves with melting curves examined.
         Three independent biological replicates were run and the significance was determined
         with SPSS software (p &lt; 0.05).
      
      Yeast two-hybrid assay
      Yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) analysis was performed in accordance with the Yeast Protocols
         Handbook (Clontech, USA). The coding regions of BnaMKK, BnaMPK and BnaWRKY genes were
         amplified from cDNA fragments of canola by high-fidelity PCR, restricted and cloned
         into pGBKT7 (BnaMPKs) or pGADT7 (BnaMKKs, BnaWRKYs) vectors, respectively, before transformed into yeast strain AH109 through the lithium
         acetate method. After selection on media (SD-Leucine-Tryptophan, SD-LT; SD-Leucine-Tryptophan-Histidine + 3’AT,
         [SD-LTH + 3’AT]; SD-Adenine-Histidine-Leucine-Tryptophan, SD-LTHA), the positive interaction
         transformants were cultivated into Yeast, peptone, dextrose (YEPD) media for serial
         dilution. The exponentially grown yeast cells were centrifuged at 3000 g at room temperature and adjusted to OD600 = 0.5 with sterilized double-distilled water. Later on, it was diluted 1/10, 1/100
         and 1/1000. Two microliters of the aforementioned serial diluted yeast cells were
         spotted onto SD-LT, SD-LTH + 3’AT and SD-LTHA media, grown in 30C for 2-5&nbsp;days, before
         photographed.
      
      The colony-lift filter assay was conducted following the instruction in the Yeast
         Protocols Handbook. The freshly grown colonies on the selection media SD-LTHA were
         transferred onto sterilized 9&nbsp;cm filter papers and then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen
         for 20&nbsp;seconds. After thawed completely, the filter paper with colonies side up was
         transferred onto presoaked filter paper in 5&nbsp;ml of staining buffer (60&nbsp;mM Na2HPO4, 39.8&nbsp;mM NaH2PO4, 10&nbsp;mM KCl, 1&nbsp;mM MgSO4, 0.817&nbsp;mM 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-D-galactopyranoside [X-gal] and 38.5&nbsp;mM β-mercaptomethanol)
         in a 90&nbsp;mm petri dish for 8-12&nbsp;h at 37°C. After that, the reaction was stopped and
         filter paper dried before photographed.
      
      In vivo bimolecular florescence complementation (BiFC) analysis
      
      For yellow fluorescence protein (YFP)-based BiFC, the coding regions of tested BnaMPKs were subcloned into pSPYNE(R)173 and, the coding regions of BnaMKK or BnaWRKY genes were subcloned into pSPYCE(M) vector [88]. The primers used are listed in Additional file 9: Table S4. After confirmation by sequencing, these constructs and p19 of tomato bushy
         stunt virus were transferred into A. tumefaciens GV3101. Freshly grown agrobacterium cultures were resuspended in a freshly made solution
         containing 10&nbsp;mM MES-KOH, pH&nbsp;5.6, 10&nbsp;mM MgCl2 and 0.15&nbsp;mM acetosyringone, with OD600 adjusted to be 0.7-0.8, before mixed at 1:1:1 ratio, incubated at room temperature
         for 2-4&nbsp;h, and infiltrated into the leaves of N. benthamiana[89]. At 4 d, the leaf sections near the injection sites were taken and used to examine
         the YFP signals under a confocal microscope A1R (Nikon, Japan).
      
   

