Methods
   
      Study subjects
      The study included index patients from 145 breast and/or ovarian cancer families who
         have been assessed and confirmed to be negative for BRCA1/2 germ line mutations and described previously (Group 1) [38]. After identification of mutations from the entire coding region of the CHEK2 gene in this cohort, an additional cohort of 229 BRCA1/2-negative high-risk patients was screened for the two identified mutations (Group
         2). The index cases were identified using the following criteria: i) families with
         one female breast cancer diagnosed ≤30 years of age, ii) families with two first-
         or second-degree (through a male) female relatives diagnosed with breast cancer; at
         least one diagnosed ≤50 years of age, iii) families with at least three cases of breast
         cancer; at least one diagnosed ≤50 years of age, iv) families with one male breast
         cancer case diagnosed at any age, v) families with at least one female breast cancer
         and one ovarian cancer at any age, vi) families with one ovarian cancer diagnosed
         ≤45 years of age and vii) families with at least two ovarian cancers; at least one
         diagnosed ≤45 years of age. Breast and ovarian cancer in the same patient were counted
         as two independent cases. The number of index cases by phenotype for Group 1 and Group
         2 are shown in Table&nbsp;1.
      
      Table 1. Description of index cases screened for CHEK2 mutations
      Control population comprised 150 healthy females of Pakistani origin. These were either
         attendants of hospital registered patients or visiting the cancer centre for medical
         reasons other than cancer. All study participants were furnished with and signed an
         informed written consent. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
         of the SKMCH &amp; RC.
      
      Mutation screening
      Genomic DNA was extracted as previously described [38]. The entire coding region and exon-intron junctions of the CHEK2 gene (Genbank accession number NM_007194.2) were screened in the 145 index patients
         using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) analysis. DHPLC analysis
         was carried out with the WAVE system (Transgenomics, Omaha, NE). Since multiple homologous
         copies are present for exons 10–14 of this gene, a nested PCR approach was employed
         as previously described [40]. PCR-primer pairs and DHPLC running conditions for exon 1 and exons 4–14 were according
         to Dufault and colleagues [41] and for exons 2 and 3 according to Kleibl and colleagues [42]. When available, a mutation positive control for each exon was included in the DHPLC
         analyses.
      
      The presence of the CHEK2 mutations identified in Group 1 was subsequently assessed in the 229 BRCA1/2-negative high-risk cases of Group 2 and in 150 healthy female controls.
      
      DNA sequence analysis
      Each sample showing variants detected by DHPLC analysis was sequenced using an automated
         DNA CEQ 8000 sequencer (Beckman, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturers’
         instructions. Bi-directional genomic DNA sequencing was performed to verify the presence
         of a mutation.
      
      In silico analyses
      
      CHEK2 missense variants (p.P92R; p.R406C) were analyzed for their potential effect on protein
         function using the default settings of web tools Align-GVGD (http://agvgd.iarc.fr/agvgd_input.php webcite), PolyPhen2 (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2 webcite), SIFT (http://sift.jcvi.org webcite) and SNAP (http://www.rostlab.org/services/snap webcite).
      
   

