Methods
   
      Lakeridge Health (LH) is a large community hospital network in southeastern Ontario
         comprised of four campuses that together provide a wide range of services. In 2001,
         a hospitalist program was initiated at the largest campus (LH Oshawa) with five family
         physicians recruited from the local community (“FP-Hospitalists”). This program has
         expanded to 16 full time equivalent family physician-trained hospitalists who care
         for acute medical, oncology, renal-dialysis, stroke, palliative and rehab inpatients.
         FP-Hospitalists also provide medical consults to surgeons, co-manage patients with
         the orthopedic and psychiatry programs and provide care to healthy newborns. In 2005,
         a sister hospitalist program was instituted at the Oshawa campus, comprised of 2 general
         internists (“GIM-Hospitalists”). This program has since expanded to include 4 full-time
         equivalent GIM-Hospitalists who provide care to a similar population as the FP-Hospitalists
         although with a heavier emphasis on cardiac patients. The general internists also
         provide coverage for the stroke prevention and pre-operative clinics, as well as medical
         consultations to subspecialists and FP-Hospitalists. Almost all FP-Hospitalists spend
         100 percent of their clinical time delivering inpatient care, while the GIM-Hospitalists
         spend 25 percent of their time covering the above-mentioned hospital-based ambulatory
         clinics.
      
      While the FP- and GIM -Hospitalists are funded and administrated separately, there
         is a close working relationship between the two groups. For example, GIM-Hospitalists
         admit all medical patients from the Emergency Department (ED) during the day, while
         FP-Hospitalists admit patients in the evenings. Both groups are geographically distributed,
         such that FP-Hospitalists attend to patients on three acute medical units while the
         GIM-Hospitalists are responsible for one medical ward that includes telemetry beds.
         As a result, patients admitted by one group may be looked after by the other. Both
         groups attend patients on the Short Stay Unit and patients boarded in the ED. Members
         of both groups also participate in code blue and code stroke coverage, ICU transfers
         to the ward, and various quality improvement initiatives. The FP-Hospitalists work
         13&nbsp;weeks in a 16-week rotation, while GIM-Hospitalists work 3&nbsp;weeks out of 4.
      
      A declining number of community family physicians (“traditional FPs”) continue to
         admit and look after their own patients at the Oshawa campus. As well, some inpatients
         with clearly defined medical problems continue to be cared for by internal medicine
         subspecialists (“other-IM”), particularly cardiologists and gastroenterologists.
      
      In order to study care differences among our institution’s two traditional physician
         staffing models (traditional FPs and other-IM) and newer hospitalist programs (FP-Hospitalist
         and GIM-Hospitalist), we used a national administrative database maintained by the
         Canadian Institute of Health Information (CIHI). Canadian hospitals provide a large
         number of demographic, diagnostic and outcomes data on all hospitalization episodes
         to the CIHI Discharge Abstract Database (DAD). The DAD uses the International Classification
         of Diseases and Canadian Classification of Health Interventions systems to categorize
         and code diagnoses and therapeutic interventions. CIHI has also devised a Case Mix
         Grouping (CMG) methodology to group patients with similar resource utilization under
         the same diagnostic categories. In 2007, CIHI introduced an enhanced methodology (called
         CMG Plus) that replaced the earlier CMG groupings. Moreover, CIHI has developed a
         methodology for measurement of Hospital Standardized Mortality Ratios (HSMR) which
         is reported nationally.
      
      Through the Decision Support department of LH, we obtained DAD data on all adult admissions
         to LH Oshawa from April 2003 through to March 2010. Inclusion criteria were all patients
         18&nbsp;years and older admitted to the medical program. We excluded surgical, obstetrical
         and psychiatric cases, and cases for which the primary care providers were non-medical
         (refer to Appendix A for details). The main quality outcome measures were in-hospital
         mortality and 30-day same-facility readmission rate, and length of stay (LOS) was
         used as a surrogate for resource utilization. We conducted multivariate logistic and
         linear regression analyses to identify demographic and clinical factors affecting
         these outcome measures, including physician provider groups (refer to Appendix A for
         statistical details). We also examined HSMRs calculated using the CIHI methodology,
         with 95% confidence intervals calculated using Byar’s approximation [11]. Data were analyzed using SPSS version 19. The Research Ethics Board of Lakeridge
         Health approved the study.
      
   

