Methods
   
      Cell lines and reagents
      Cervical cancer cell lines HeLa, CaSki, C33A and SiHa (American Type Culture Collection,
         Rockville, Md., USA) (cell line authentication was done by in-house STR DNA profiling
         analysis) were employed in this study. They were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified
         Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine
         serum (Gibco), 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco) at 37°C in an incubator
         with humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air. AMPK activators AICAR, A23187 and metformin and AKT inhibitor LY294002
         were obtained from Tocris Bioscience (Bristol, UK). FOXM1 inhibitor Thiostrepton was
         purchased from Calbiochem (La Jolla, CA, USA).
      
      Plasmids and cell transfection
      To study the effects of enforced FOXM1 expression, the FOXM1c-expressing plasmid pcDNA3–FOXM1c
         was used because the c isoform has higher transactivating activity and is expressed
         dominantly in cells as well as tissues. Whereas, the pcDNA3 empty vector was used
         in mock transfections as control. Besides, the vector-based shRNA plasmid pTER–FOXM1
         was used to knockdown endogenous FOXM1. All of these plasmids had been described previously
         [18]. As controls in knockdown assays, the p-super GFP and pcDNA3 vectors were used in
         mock transactions. To knockdown human FOXO3a, the TriFECTa RNAi Kit which contains
         three siRNAs targeting human FOXO3a was purchased from IDT (Integrated DNA Technologies,
         Inc., Iowa, USA). Cell transfection was carried out using LipofectAMINETM 2000 (Invitrogen)
         according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Expression patterns were analyzed by
         Western blotting. The parental vector pEGFP-C1 was used as empty vector control.
      
      Cell proliferation assay
      Cell proliferation kit (XTT) (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) was used to measure cell
         viability according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Three independent experiments
         were performed in triplicates.
      
      RNA extraction and quantitative reverse transcriptase–PCR (Q-PCR)
      According to the instruction of the manufacturer, total RNA was extracted using TRIzol
         reagent (Invitrogen). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was subsequently synthesized using
         a reverse transcription reagent kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City). The expression
         level of FOXM1 was then evaluated by q-PCR in an ABI PRISM™ 7500 system (Applied Biosystems) using
         Taqman® Gene expression Assays; human FOXM1 (Assay ID: Hs00153543_m1). The human 18S rRNA (Assay ID: Hs99999901_m1) was used as an internal control.
      
      Western blot analysis
      Proteins in cell lysates were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and transferred to polyvinylidene-difluoride
         (PVDF) membranes. The membranes were blotted with 5% skimmed milk and subsequently
         probed overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies specific for p-AMPKα, AMPKα, p-AKT,
         AKT, p-FOXO3a, FOXO3a (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA), FOXM1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
         Inc., Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and then
         incubated with horseradish peroxidase conjugated goat anti-rabbit or anti-mouse secondary
         antibody (Amersham, Uppsala, Sweden). Immunodetection was performed with enhanced
         chemiluminescent reagent solution (AmershamTM ECLTM) and visualized using medical X-ray film.
      
      Data analysis
      Student’s t test was applied to the data analysis. All data were expressed as mean ± SEM. P-value of less than 0.05 was considered as significant.
      
   

