
			
				
					Abstract

				
				
					
						Purpose

					1. To develop a framework for exposure calculation via the dermal route to meet the needs of 21st century toxicity testing and refine current approaches; 2. To demonstrate the impact of exposure scenario and application conditions on the plasma concentration following dermal exposure.

				
				
					
						Method

					A workflow connecting a dynamic skin penetration model with a generic whole-body physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model was developed. The impact of modifying exposure scenarios and application conditions on the simulated steady-state plasma concentration and exposure conversion factor was investigated for 9 chemicals tested previously in dermal animal studies which did not consider kinetics in their experimental designs.

				
				
					
						Results

					By simulating the animal study scenarios and exposure conditions, we showed that 7 studies were conducted with finite dose exposures, 1 with both finite and infinite dose exposures (in these 8 studies, an increase in the animal dose resulted in an increase in the simulated steady-state plasma concentrations ( C 
						 p,ss )), while 1 study was conducted with infinite dose exposures only (an increase in the animal dose resulted in identical  C 
						 p,ss ). Steady-state plasma concentrations were up to 30-fold higher following an infinite dose scenario vs. a finite dose scenario, and up to 40-fold higher with occlusion vs. without. Depending on the chemical, the presence of water as a vehicle increased or decreased the steady-state plasma concentration, the largest difference being a factor of 16.

				
				
					
						Conclusions

					The workflow linking Kasting’s model of skin penetration and whole-body PBPK enables estimation of plasma concentrations for various applied doses, exposure scenarios and application conditions. Consequently, it provides a quantitative, mechanistic tool to refine dermal exposure calculations methodology for further use in risk assessment.

				
			
		