Methods
   
      Numerical integration
      A characteristic of semi-quantitative, macroscopic models of two-scale processes is
         the development of spatially discontinuous functions for the cell specific transcription
         factors (see position marked with dashed circles in Figure&nbsp;2). A standard heat equation solver or spectral methods cannot solve this models without
         prior knowledge of the discontinuity’s position. The numerical integration method
         must solve the PDE as well as the increasingly discontinuous solutions for the ODEs
         without mollifying. We used a semi-discretization in space so if △x denotes a discretized Laplace operator we obtained an initial value problem for ODEs
         given by 
      
      
         
            
         
      
       for each grid point xi, i = 1,…N. As all solutions are in  we needed a L2 stable spatial discretization and we chose finite differences. We took into account
         that with h→0, where h is the grid width, the generated ODEs became increasingly stiff. The finite differences
         method yields a Jacobian matrix with a special sparsity pattern. The matrix is non
         zero only on the eight subdiagonals and the eight superdiagonals, which we use to
         enhance the performance of the ODE solver. The algorithm is implemented for MATLAB R2012a and can be found in Additional file 5: Data S1.
      
      Additional file 5. Data S1. MATLAB files for simulation.
         	Format: ZIP 
         	Size: 8KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Steady state approximation and stability analysis
      We determined the steady states by simulating the model with the parameters given
         in the results section from different initial conditions until the calculated state
         of the system changed less than machine accuracy between two time steps. This was
         repeated for many different initial conditions, space fillingly sampled, to find as
         many steady states as possible with a numerical simulation.
      
      In a second step, we identified the stability of the reached state. Therefore, we
         added uniform distributed noise, , to the calculated value for each component under the constraint that ui(t,x) + ϵ≥0 for i = 1,…,6 and vj(t,x) + ϵ≥0 for j = 1,2. We used the obtained value as the initial condition for the approximation
         of the steady state. If the unperturbed state was reached again we concluded that
         the state was stable.
      
      Experimental animals
      Outbred CD-1 mice were purchased from Charles River (Kisslegg, Germany) and kept under
         a 12-12 light-dark cycle under standard conditions. Mice had ad libitum access to
         food and water. Noon on the day of vaginal plug detection was designated as embryonic
         day (E) 0.5. Embryos were staged according to Theiler [43].
      
      miRNA prediction
      To improve the robustness of the predicted miRNAs that target the Wnt1 mRNA, data sets of five most commonly used miRNA prediction tools were used in combination.
         A miRNA target was considered as a candidate if the miRNA target interaction was predicted
         by at least three out of five miRNA target prediction tools. For the miRNA target
         prediction, we used the following publicly available tools: TargetScan [44], PicTar [45], miRNAMAP (miranda) [46], TargetSpy [47] and miRBase (DIANA) [48].
      
      Radioactive in situ hybridization (ISH) and probe labeling
      
      Timed-pregnant mice were killed by CO2 asphyxiation. Uterine horns were removed and kept in cold phosphate buffered saline
         (PBS) before dissection of the embryos. Embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
         (PFA) (Sigma, Germany) in PBS overnight, dehydrated in an ascending ethanol series,
         cleared in xylene, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned on a microtome (Microm, Germany)
         at 8 μm thickness. Radioactive locked nucleic acid (LNA)-based ISH using unlabeled, LNA-modified
         mmu-miR-709 (Exiqon, Denmark, Cat No 39324-00) and mmu-miR-705 (Exiqon, Cat No 39320-00) detection probes were performed using an ISH protocol as
         described in [33] with minor modifications: the proteinase K treatment was omitted, pre-hybridization
         and hybridization of the labeled probes was done in an in situ Hybridization Buffer (Ambion, USA, Cat No B8807G) at 53°C, and post-hybridization
         washes were done sequentially in 1xSSC, 0.2xSSC and 0.1xSSC at 53° C. Sections were
         counterstained with Cresyl Violet (0.5%, Sigma) according to standard procedures after
         exposure for 1–3 weeks. Images were taken with an Axioplan2 microscope using bright-
         and darkfield optics, AxioCam MRc camera and Axiovision 4.6 software (Zeiss, Germany),
         and processed with Adobe Photoshop CS5 software (Adobe Systems Inc., USA). The LNA-modified
         mmu-miR-709 and mmu-miR-705 detection probes were labeled with [ α35S]-dATP (GE Healthcare, USA), using the Terminal Transferase Labeling Kit (Roche, Germany)
         according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with minor modifications: a 1:50 dilution
         (0.5 μM) of the unlabeled LNA-modified detection probe, 1 mCi/mlα35S-dATP and no UTP were used in the reaction mixture.
      
      Calculation of grayscale profile and profile fitting
      We defined a 300 pixel long and 15 pixel wide region from the approximate anterior
         end the midbrain to the approximate posterior end of the rostral hindbrain (both marked
         by dashed red lines in Figure&nbsp;4A) on a darkfield picture taken from a sagittal sections of an E12.5 wild-type embryo
         hybridized with the radioactive mmu-miR-709 detection probe). Using the software ImageJ (NIH, USA), we calculated the gray value
         in this picture at each pixel within the rectangular area in Figure&nbsp;4A and averaged the values along the width of the rectangular. The gray value profile
         obtained was normalized against the mean gray value intensity in the two light blue
         squares/boxes shown in Figure&nbsp;4A. We estimated the parameters p = (p1,p2,p4) and l of the profile function αm(x) = p1(tanh((l − x)/p2) + p4) (suggested in [30]). Therefore, we minimized the quadratic distance , with pixels xi and gray value D(xi), using the minimization method fminsearch implemented in MATLAB R2012a. The optimal parameters are p1 = 0.3062, l = 0.451, p2 = 0.2, p3 = 0.064 and p4 = 2.2868 and the least squares fit of αm(x) to the gray value curve D(xi) is shown in in Figure&nbsp;3E.
      
      Luciferase sensor assays
      A 857 bp fragment of the Wnt1 3’UTR (Entrez Gene Acc. No. NM_021279, basepairs 1496-2352) was amplified from the E12.5
         mouse embryo head cDNA using the primer pair shown in Additional file 4: Table S1. This Wnt1 3’UTR fragment contains two putative BS each for mmu-miR-709 and for mmu-miR-705 as predicted by miRBase (microCosm). This fragment was subsequently subcloned into
         the XbaI site located downstream of the firefly luciferase stop codon in the pGL3 Promoter
         vector (Promega, USA). Site-directed mutagenesis of the predicted mmu-miR-709 seed sequences within the 857 bp Wnt1 3’UTR fragment was done using the Quick Change Multi-Site Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene,
         USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Mutagenic primers used are shown
         in Table S4. HEK293T (1×105 cells/well) were plated in a 24-well plate and co-transfected 24 hours later with
         300 ng ofWnt1 3’UTR-WT or Wnt1 3’UTR-MUT sensor vector, 30 ng of renilla luciferase vector, and mmu-miR-709 (Ambion, Cat No PM11496) or mmu-miR-705 (Ambion, Cat No PM11392) precursor miRNA as indicated in the figures, using Lipofectamine
         2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Luciferase activity
         was measured 48 hours after transfection using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay
         System (Promega). The firefly luciferase values were normalized against the renilla
         luciferase values as internal transfection control. As we also observed a down-regulation
         of luciferase activity after co-transfection of the precursor miRNA and the pGL3 Promoter
         vector (without any 3’UTR cloned into it) in some instances, which we considered to
         be “off-target” effects of the corresponding miRNA, we always used the co-transfection
         of pGL3 Promoter vector without 3’UTR (“empty vector”) and the corresponding miRNA
         as the control in our experiments, and this value was set as one. Transfections were
         done in triplicate and all data derive from three independent experiments.
      
      Ethics statement
      Animal treatment was conducted under federal guidelines for the use and care of laboratory
         animals and was approved by the HMGU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
      
   

