Methods
   
      Animals
      Nine horses, aged 1 month to 16 years (median 5 years) of different breeds and gender
         were treated for stromal ulcerative keratitis with CXL using riboflavin and UVA-light
         during 2010 and 2011 at ATG’s Horse Clinic in Skara, Sweden (Table&nbsp;1). All horses, except for 2 previously untreated horses, were referred because of
         failure of medical therapy, defined as non-healing ulceration or aggravation of clinical
         signs from the eye, specifically increased corneal vascularization, oedema, or stromal
         loss, or emergence of additional ulcers. The two previously untreated horses were
         included in the study upon request from the owners.
      
      The regional Ethical Committee (Göteborgs Djurförsöksetiska nämnd, Sweden, Dnr 246–2010)
         approved the use of horses for this study and informed consent was obtained from all
         horse owners prior to treatment.
      
      Ophthalmic examination
      All horses were examined by the first author before and after the CXL treatment. The
         horses were sedated and akinesia of the eyelids was induced when needed. The ophthalmic
         examination included slit-lamp biomicroscopy (Kowa SL15, Kowa Company Ltd, Nagoya,
         Japan), sampling for cytology and microbiological testing, as well as fluorescein
         staining. Samples for microbiological cultures and cytology were obtained from the
         edge of the ulcerations using a sterile swab (ESwab, Copan innovation Ltd, Brescia,
         Italy) and a special brush (Cytology brush Plus, CooperSurgical Inc., Trumbull, USA),
         respectively. Aerobic bacterial culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing was
         performed by a local laboratory (Eurofins, Lidköping, Sweden). Specimens for cytology
         were stained using May Grünwald Giemsa and Gram staining, respectively. When fungal
         hyphae were present on cytology, an additional swab was sent for fungal culture. Microbiological
         cultures and cytology were repeated after CXL in horses nos. 2 and 3 to learn if the
         microorganisms obtained in the initial samples were eliminated after treatment. All
         horses were re-examined until the ulcers healed, defined as no fluorescein dye uptake,
         and absence of clinical signs of pain or anterior uveitis. Photographs of the corneas
         were taken before CXL and at each re-examination.
      
      The depths of the ulcers were scored according to Burn's system [48]. Only horses with stromal loss comprising ≤ 2/3 of the corneal thickness were included
         in the study.
      
      The diagnosis of stromal melting was made when the stroma had a gelatinous structure
         and an abnormal, often drop-shaped contour. When the progressive stromal melting ceased,
         the structure stabilized and the size of the ulcer stopped increasing.
      
      Sedation, local and topical anesthesia
      The adult horses were sedated with 0.01 mg/kg detomidine (Domodin vet, 10 mg/ml, Novartis
         Animal Health, Copenhagen, Denmark) and 0.02 mg/kg buthorphanol (Butador vet 10 mg/ml,
         Vetoquinol Scandinavia, Åstorp, Sweden) intravenously. Sedation was maintained throughout
         the procedure using symptomatic i.v. infusion with 1 mg detomidine per 100 ml physiologic
         saline solution (Natriumklorid, Fresenius Kabi, Uppsala, Sweden).
      
      The two foals were anesthetized with a combination of 1.0 mg/kg xylazine (Rompun 20
         mg/ml, Bayer Animal Health, Copenhagen, Denmark), 0.05 mg/kg midazolam (Midazolam
         5 mg/ml, Actavis AB, Stockholm, Sweden) and 2.0 mg/kg ketamine (Ketaminol vet, 100
         mg/ml, Intervet AB, Sollentuna, Sweden).
      
      Akinesia of the eyelids was obtained after subcutaneous injection of 1 ml mepivacaine
         (Carbocain, 20 mg/ml, Astra Zeneca, Södertälje, Sweden) over the auriculopalpebral
         nerve. The cornea was anesthetized with 2 drops of oxybuprocaine eye drops (Oxibuprokain
         Chauvin, 20 mg/ml, Bausch &amp; Lomb Nordic AB, Stockholm, Sweden).
      
      Corneal collagen cross-linking, CXL
      The CXL treatment protocol was based on the protocol developed in Dresden and described
         by Wollensak et al. in 2003 [33], with minor modifications for horses. Two to 3 mm of the epithelium surrounding the
         corneal ulcer was removed using a blunted scalpel blade. Isotonic riboflavin eye drops
         (Medio-cross®, riboflavin &gt; 0.1 in dextran 500 20%, Medio-cross GmbH, Neudorf, Germany)
         were instilled every 2nd minute for 25 minutes. The non-epithelialized part of the cornea was saturated with
         riboflavin, which could be observed as a yellowish discoloration.
      
      A lid speculum was inserted to keep the eye open during light exposure. Prior to each
         treatment, the UVA-light source (CCL-365, Peschke Meditrade GmbH, Huenenberg, Switzerland)
         was calibrated according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The corneal ulcer
         was then exposed during 30 minutes to a 365 nm light with an irradiance of 3.0 mW/cm2 and a beam diameter of 10 mm (Figure&nbsp;4). This light source has an optical system that provides a uniform (Köhler) illumination
         of the treated area [49]. The distance between the UVA-light source and the cornea (5 cm) was maintained throughout
         the procedure by supporting the light source by one hand resting against the head
         of the horse. The light source would then also follow any movements made by the horse
         and stay centred on the ulcerated area. The operator continuously monitored that the
         beam remained focused and sharply circumscribed at the corneal surface. Care was taken
         not to illuminate the limbus with the UV-light.
      
      Figure 4. Corneal collagen cross-linking. A handheld UVA-light source was employed to irradiate the corneal ulcer during 30
         minutes. The edge of the light beam was sharply circumscribed when the lamp was held
         at a distance of 5 cm from the corneal surface, which enhanced maintaining the correct
         distance between the lamp and the patient’s eye.
      
      All horses except horse no. 3 received topical medication after CXL treatment, according
         to a standard protocol, with 5 ml chloramphenicol eye drops (Chloromycetin, 5 mg/ml,
         Pfizer AB, Sollentuna, Sweden) and 1 ml atropine eye drops (Isopto-Atropin 1%, Alcon
         Sverige AB, Stockholm, Sweden) diluted in autologous serum in 1.8 mg/ml EDTA (serum
         collected in EDTA-tubes) to a total volume of 10 ml. This mixture was instilled on
         the eye through a continuous delivery system (Infu-Disc™, San Diego, CA, USA) at a
         rate of 0.14 ml/h. Accidently, horse no. 3 got autologous serum and atropine only
         in the delivery system. To relieve postoperative discomfort and treat concomitant
         uveitis, 1.1 mg/kg flunixin meglumine (Cronyxin vet 50 mg/ml, Ceva Animal Health,
         Lund, Sweden) was given intravenously once daily for 5–8 days in all horses. Horse
         nos. 3, 7 and 8 were also given penicillin G sodium (Geepenil vet 300 mg/ml, Orion
         Pharma Animal Health, Sollentuna, Sweden) 14 mg/kg, intravenously q8h, for 6, 8 and
         4 days respectively.
      
      Statistical analyses
      Medians and ranges are used as descriptive statistics in this study.
   

