Methods
   
      Included in this prospective, single-center case-series were consecutive patients
         who underwent clear cornea extracapsular cataract extraction by phacoemulsification
         and intracapsular lens implantation combined with ELT (phaco-ELT) between 01/2008
         and 10/2009. If both eyes of a patient underwent phaco-ELT, only the eye that was
         operated first was included in the study; thus, 9 eyes were excluded. Patients were
         followed-up at 12 months ± 2 weeks after the procedure. All subjects were recruited
         from the ophthalmological out-patient department and gave prior written informed consent.
         The study was approved by the local ethics committee (Ethics Committee of the Canton
         Zurich, KEK-ZH-Nr. 881, 06/07/2009) and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of
         Helsinki and local law. The study is registered in the clinical trials registry of
         the U.S. National Institutes of Health (http://www.clinicaltrials.gov webcite, NCT01194310). Intraocular pressure (using Goldmann applanation tonometry), best
         corrected visual acuity (BCVA, using Snellen charts), slit lamp biomicroscopy of the
         anterior and posterior segment as well as glaucoma medication history were documented
         by one examiner (M. T.-H.). The indications for a combined phaco-ELT intervention
         were the presence of a visually significant cataract (BCVA less than or equal to 0.5
         Snellen) and a moderately elevated IOP in the absence of medical therapy, or a moderate
         cataract (BCVA less than or equal to 0.8 Snellen) and uncontrolled IOP despite medical
         therapy.
      
      Inclusion/exclusion criteria
      Inclusion criteria were a diagnosis of ocular hypertension or manifest glaucoma with
         typical glaucomatous cupping of the optic disc, visual field changes, or both, together
         with an open iridocorneal angle (grade 3 or 4 on the Shaffer scale [25]). Patients with advanced glaucoma (i.e., fixation-threatening visual-field defects)
         or with an IOP ≥35 mmHg were excluded. Patients with a history of optic neuropathies
         other than glaucoma were also excluded.
      
      Surgical procedure
      All surgeries were performed by the same surgeon (J. F.). A standard clear-cornea
         phacoemulsification and intracapsular lens implantation (Alcon MA 50 BM, Alcon Inc.,
         Hünenberg, Switzerland) was performed. Immediately afterwards, a medical miosis was
         induced by acetylcholine chloride (Miochol) and the anterior chamber was deepened
         with viscoelastic (sodium hyaluronate, Healon). An endoscopically-guided photoablative
         laser operating at a wavelength of 308 nm (excimer laser, AIDA, TUI-Laser, Munich,
         Germany) was used to create ten microperforations (ELT channels) into the trabecular
         meshwork spread over an area of 90°. Each ELT channel was approximately 0.2 mm in
         diameter. Further details of the laser device are provided in Table&nbsp;1. In order to transmit adequate sub-threshold energy of the laser to the target tissue,
         the instrument tip had to touch the TM (see Figure&nbsp;1). After laser application a formation of bubbles was seen together with a small retrograde
         bleeding, indicating the perforation of the trabecular meshwork and the inner wall
         of Schlemm’s canal (see Figure&nbsp;2). In all patients the bleeding resolved spontaneously. At the end of the surgical
         procedure, the viscoelastic was washed out of the anterior chamber and the globe was
         pressurized to approximately 15 mmHg. The paracentesis and clear corneal incision
         were hydrated with sterile balanced salt solution (BSS). Cefazolin and Dexamethasone
         were injected subconjunctivally at the end of the procedure. Intracameral endophthalmitis
         prophylaxis was not used because at the time of the study no commercially available
         antibiotic solution was certified or approved for this purpose, and because of the
         risk of serious side effects (e.g. toxic anterior segment syndrome, anaphylaxis in
         patients with a history of penicillin allergy). Combined Tobramycin and Dexamethasone
         ointment was applied and the eye was covered with an eye patch overnight. From the
         first postoperative day, Tobramycin and Dexamethasone eye drops (q.i.d.) and Tobramycin
         and Dexamethasone ointment (at bedtime) were applied for 2 weeks. After the second
         week, only the eye drops (three times daily) were applied and reduced weekly by one
         drop.
      
      Table 1. Technical data of the AIDA excimer laser
      Figure 1. Under endoscopic guidance, ten laser spots were applied into the trabecular meshwork
            spread over an area of 90°. At the point of laser transmission, the probe is in direct contact with the trabecular
         meshwork.
      
      Figure 2. After laser application a formation of bubbles could be seen, together with a small
            retrograde bleeding.
      Study endpoints
      Primary study endpoints were IOP and number of antiglaucoma drugs (AGD) taken. Secondary
         study endpoints were BCVA, intra- and postoperative complications, and the requirement
         for subsequent glaucoma surgery.
      
      Statistical analyses
      Descriptive statistics for quantitative variables such as mean, standard deviation,
         95% confidence interval and relative frequencies for qualitative variables were calculated
         for all study eyes (without dropouts) and for the two subgroups separately – one with
         a preoperative IOP of ≤21 mmHg (study group) and one with a preoperative IOP of &gt;21
         mmHg (control group). Data are given as arithmetic mean ± standard deviation. A student’s
         t test was used for testing significant changes in IOP, BCVA and number of AGD. The
         significance level was defined by p &lt; 0.05. For statistics (e.g. percentage change),
         BCVA was transformed to logMAR values and retransformed into Snellen for reporting
         of the results [26,27]. Additionally, the number of patients that met the success criteria was calculated.
         Statistical analyses were conducted in SPSS software version 19.0.0 for Macintosh
         (IBM Corporation, New York, NY, USA).
      
      Definition of success and failure
      Success was defined based on the criteria from the Tube Versus Trabeculectomy study
         (TVT study) [28] as postoperative IOP below or equal to 21 mmHg and IOP reduction of at least 20%.
         In addition, the number of AGD postoperatively had to be less than or equal to that
         recorded preoperatively. Subsequent surgery within the follow-up period (12 months)
         due to insufficient IOP reduction at the initial intervention was classified as treatment
         failure.
      
   

