Methods
   
      Study area
      The study was conducted at the Dubai Desert Conservation Reserve, United Arab Emirates.
         The site is made-up of two sections, where camel are freely grazing (referred to as
         DDCR) and a core area where strict conservation measures are in place, camel grazing
         is excluded, off-roading controlled and wildlife is abundant (referred to as Al-Maha
         area or AMR). Unfortunately, the larger Dubai Desert Conservation Reserve (DDCR) was
         suffering heavy grazing pressure by free ranging Camels, but off-road driving was
         relatively minimized while violations are still being recorded. These differences
         are being present for about 7–8 years since the site has been setup. Three soil types
         or substrates are present at both sections: sand dunes, sand flats and gravel plains.
      
      Approach
      Field sampling procedure involved using random sampling points selected over the 3
         main habitats; namely gravel plains, sand flats and sand dunes. A total of 126 plots
         (86 from Al-Maha and 40 from DDCR) were selected: 36 were on sand dunes (21 in the
         AMR and 15 in the DDCR), 28 were on sand flats (16 in the AMR and 12 in the DDCR)
         and 62 were on gravel plains (49 in the AMR and 13 in the DDCR) [25]. For the sand flats and sand dunes, plots were selected using a 500 m grid selected
         over the whole area. Circular plots were used for the sampling. Each circular plot
         involved sampling an area of 50m diameter. This way each plot is equivalent to 7000
         m2. The percent cover for each species was measured within each sampling quadrat.
      
      Procedure
      Close range photography was used to take picture of each plot from breast height of
         about 1.5 meters above ground using a Canon Power Shot camera with a 5-megapixel resolution.
         Images were within the center of the sampled area. Images taken at close range were
         pixel-analyzed using ERDAS imagine [33]. The procedure involved pixel analysis to quantify percent cover for each species
         within each of the plots. We used a supervised classification where a training group
         of pixels was hand-selected and applied for each species. A total of 114 images were
         analyzed (Sand Dunes 36, Sand flats 27 and Gravel Plains 50 images). Data from the
         images were compared to species cover data collected in the field. All distorted and/or
         off-center images were not included in the analysis. A sample field image is included
         in Figure 1.
      
      Figure 1. Sample vertical image for a plot assessing floral cover in the UAE desert ecosystem.
      Another step of the analysis involved agreements on each species’ ranking using both
         field-based and image-based techniques. A Pearson correlation analysis was performed
         to assess compatibility between the two methodologies (Table 1). Furthermore, separate Kruskal-Wallis tests were performed using SPSS [34]. One involved comparing field and photo analyses techniques as affected by grazing
         intensities (Al-Maha and DDCR; Table 2), while the second dealt with the effects of soil substrate (Sande dunes, Sand flats
         and Gravel plains) using the two sampling techniques (Table 3). A third Kruskal-Wallis test was performed for every plant species’ ranking, averaged
         over grazing intensities and soil substrates (Table 4). The hypothesis for the formers was that the median score of field ranking, within
         each grazing intensity or soil substrate, is not significantly different than the
         median score of image ranking. The hypothesis for the latter was that the median score
         of field ranking, for each species, is not significantly different than the median
         score of image ranking.
      
      Table 3. Kruskal-Wallis test results of level of agreements between field and digital imaging
            and the effects of grazing intensities on estimating plant cover in a desert ecosystem
      Table 4. Kruskal-Wallis test results of level of agreements between field and digital imaging
            and the effects of soil substrates on estimating plant cover in a desert ecosystem
   

