Methods
   
      This monocentric prospective study included every prevalent and incident patient admitted
         in Rouen University Hospital Hemodialysis Unit, from January 2009 through April 2010.
         Patients with acute renal failure were excluded.
      
      All patients received dialysis with a Fresenius 5008 dialysis machine (Fresenius Medical
         Care, Bad Homburg, Germany) and biocompatible high-flux membranes (Kuf &gt; 40&nbsp;ml/h/mmHg)
         with surface area above 1.8&nbsp;m2. Prevalent patients had an AVF every time it was possible. For incident patients,
         tunnelized catheters were placed in the days following the initiation of hemodialysis
         and were converted to AVF as soon as possible. The traditional regimen consisted of
         4 hours dialysis sessions, three times a week. Patients were treated with conventional
         hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration. Blood flow rate and dialysate flow rate were 400
         ml/min and 800 ml/min, respectively. The dialysis dose (Kt) was available for each
         seance via the on-line clearance monitoring module (OCM), measuring ionic dialysance.
         The volume of distribution of urea was estimated using bio-impedancemetry (BCM; body
         composition monitor, Fresenius Medical care, Bad Homburg, Germany) [8]. For the patients on hemodiafiltration, the infusion volume was also collected. Isothermic
         dialysis, by means of a blood temperature monitor (Module BTM, available on Fresenius
         5008 machines), and isonatremic dialysis were systematically performed [9,10]. A dialysate calcium of 1.5&nbsp;mmol/l was used for the majority of patients, while 1.75&nbsp;mmol/l
         was never used. The bicarbonate content of the dialysate was individualized and adjusted
         to achieve a pre-dialysis bicarbonate level between 20 and 24 mmol/l.
      
      When malnutrition was diagnosed, patients received nutritional counselling from a
         qualified dietician. Nutrition supplements were prescribed if nutritional counselling
         did not achieve an increase in nutrient intake to a level covering minimum recommendations.
         Intradialytic parenteral nutrition was prescribed in the patients who experienced
         dietary support and/or oral supplement failure, in particular in hospitalized patients
         with acute inflammatory state or inflammatory bowel disease (Smofkabiven 1100 kcal,
         Fresenius Kabi, France, the dose was increased at 1600 kcal per dialysis session in
         case of good tolerance). All patients received calcifediol once a week, the dose depending
         on the severity of 25OH-vitamin D deficiency. Statins were systematically prescribed.
      
      For patients with high blood pressure (BP &gt; 140/90&nbsp;mmHg) despite antihypertensive
         multitherapy, after reduction of the dry weight when necessary, ambulatory blood pressure
         monitoring was performed to confirm hypertension before prescribing an additional
         antihypertensive agent.
      
      Changes in the prescription of erythropoiesis stimulating agents (ESA), phosphate
         binders and bicarbonate dialysate concentration were carried out every month in parallel.
         Before adjusting ESA, intravenous iron supplementation was performed, if needed, to
         reach a ferritinemia between 200 and 500 μg/l and transferrin saturation &gt; 20%.
      
      The following indicators were collected monthly: Hemoglobin, ESA dose, serum phosphorus,
         calcium, albumin and bicarbonate concentrations. Unless specified, the following indicators
         were recorded every quarter:
      
      Serum parathyroid hormone, serum 25OHvitD (every 6 months), serum β2-microglobulin.
      Total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol.
      Technique of renal replacement therapy: hemodialysis, post-dilution on-line hemodiafiltration,
         pre-dilution on-line hemodiafiltration, daily post-dilution on-line hemodiafiltration,
         hemofiltration.
      
      Pre-dialysis systolic and diastolic BP of the 10 last dialysis sessions. The mean
         of the 10 values was used to determine whether or not the target was achieved.
      
      Dialysis dose: On-line urea clearance estimation makes it possible to calculate the
         dialysis dose Kt and thus allows for the estimation of the « single-pool » Kt/V for
         each session [8]. Kt/VBCM of the 10 last dialysis sessions were collected. The mean of the 10 values was used
         to determine whether or not the target was achieved (Kt/VBCM &gt; 1.4).
      
      Percentage of dialysis sessions with symptomatic intradialytic hypotension (IDH),
         defined by a decline in BP associated with specific symptoms, with the need to stop
         ultrafiltration and/or saline infusion, taking into account the last 10 sessions.
      
      Prevalence of conformity was defined by the percentage of patients who attained targets
         for each indicator. Every quarter, the mean value and the prevalence of conformity
         for each quality-of-care indicator were calculated in the global population and in
         the patients who remained in the center between January 2009 and April 2010.
      
      This study did not require ethical approval according to French research legislation.
      Targets, shown in Table&nbsp;1, were defined by international guidelines including KDOQI and EBPG guidelines, and
         by evidence available in the literature in the absence of existing guidelines [5,11-13]. When conformity rates were below those found in guidelines or literature, a decision
         was made to initiate corrective measures. For the main indicators, quarterly meetings
         were organized, where individual corrective measures were decided for the patients
         who did not attain the target.
      
      Table 1. Quality-of-care indicators, targets and references
      Statistical analysis: Comparison between initial (January 2009) and follow-up (April
         2010) conformity rates was made using chi-square analysis. P &lt; 0.05 was considered
         to indicate significance.
      
   

