Methods
   
      Animals
      Eighty-one mixed-breed, male and female, adult dogs, which were referred to the Veterinary
         Teaching Hospital at UNESP - São Paulo State University, and to the local Zoonosis
         Control Center, between August/2006 and June/2009, were used in this study. The municipality
         of Araçatuba is an endemic area for VL with a seroprevalence of canine VL of 12% [26]. Blood samples were collected before the dogs were euthanized, in compliance with
         the State law, with an overdose of pentobarbital and potassium chloride. Necropsies
         were performed immediately after euthanasia, and gross lesions were recorded. None
         of the animals presented history of neurological symptoms.
      
      Parasitological and serological analysis
      The diagnosis of VL was achieved by serological and parasitological examinations.
         Serological diagnosis was done using ELISA tests as described by Lima et al. [27] with the lower limit of positivity (cut-off) considered as 0.270 (optical density).
         Parasitological diagnosis of VL was achieved by finding typical amastigotes forms
         of Leishmania in cytological examinations of tissue smears from the popliteal lymph node.
      
      The serological diagnosis of toxoplasmosis and neosporosis was performed using indirect
         immunofluorescence assays as described by Varandas et al. [28], being considered seropositives those dogs presenting antibody titer equal to or
         greater than 1:16 and 1:50, respectively.
      
      Experimental design
      The dogs were divided into four experimental groups: (1) the LTN group was composed
         of 24 dogs with concurrent seropositivity to VL, toxoplasmosis and/or to neosporosis;
         (2) the L group was constituted by 31 dogs with seropositivity only to VL; (3) the
         TN group was composed of 16 dogs with negative diagnosis to VL and with seropositivity
         to toxoplasmosis and/or to neosporosis; and (4) the C group, constituted by 10 control
         healthy dogs with negative diagnosis for VL, toxoplasmosis and neosporosis, which
         death have not been related to CNS injury and which were referred by the owners to
         the Animal Pathology Service of UNESP - São Paulo State University in Araçatuba (Table&nbsp;1). Age and gender were not taken into account in the analyses, since Gennari et al.
         [19] detected no association between gender or age and the prevalence of toxoplasmosis,
         neosporosis or visceral leishmaniasis.
      
      Table 1. Gender and age range of the dogs included in this study, according to the experimental
            groups
      Histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
      The brain was sagitally sliced after removal and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin.
         Tissue samples were paraffin-embedded, sectioned (4&nbsp;μm) and stained with haematoxylin
         &amp; eosin (HE) using routine protocols. The following areas were evaluated for lesions:
         ventricular choroid plexi, ependyma and sub-ependymal area, leptomeninges in the temporal
         and piriform cortex and in the thalamus. The histopathological examination was done
         to verify the presence of inflammatory cells particularly in the perivascular, ventricular
         and sub-meningeal spaces.
      
      IHC stains were performed using standard streptavidin-biotin peroxidase (HRP) immunostaining
         with polyclonal rabbit anti-human CD3 antibody (Dako A0452, Carpinteria, CA, USA)
         to detect CD3+ T lymphocytes, and the monoclonal mouse anti-human CD79αcy antibody (Dako M7051,
         Carpinteria, CA, USA) to identify CD79α+ B lymphocytes. Slides were deparaffinised in xylene and hydrated through graded alcohols.
         Antigen retrieval was achieved by steam heating in Tris-EDTA buffer plus 0.05% (v/v)
         Tween-20, pH&nbsp;9.0, for 30&nbsp;minutes. To inhibit endogenous peroxidase, slides were incubated
         with 2% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide 30 vol. diluted in 50% (v/v) methanol and deionized
         water for 30&nbsp;minutes, and nonspecific binding was blocked with 3% (w/v) non-fat dry
         milk in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) pH&nbsp;7.2 for 30&nbsp;minutes. Primary antibodies
         against CD3 (1:100), and CD79α (1:50) were applied for 18–22&nbsp;hours at 4°C in a humidified
         chamber. Slides were washed in PBS, incubated with a biotinylated secondary antibody
         and streptavidin-HRP complex (Dako K0690 LSAB+ Kit, Carpinteria, CA, USA), then the reaction was developed with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine
         (Dako K3468, Carpinteria, CA, USA) and counterstained with Harris’s haematoxylin,
         dehydrated, cleared with xylene, and mounted with cover slips. For internal IHC control,
         sections of canine lymph node were used as positive control, and for negative control
         the primary antibody incubation was skipped in some slides. Tissue sections were examined
         by light microscopy. The presence of immunostained cells was analysed colorimetrically,
         quantifying the percentage of the immunostained area in relation to the total area,
         using the software Image-Pro Plus 6.1 (Media Cybernetics, Bethesda, MA, USA) according
         to the guidelines described by Melo and Machado [24]. Twenty images representative of twenty microscopic fields (90,506.04&nbsp;μm2 per field, at the magnification of 40×) were obtained in four pre-defined encephalic
         areas: (1) leptomeninges in the temporal and piriform cortex; (2) ependyma and sub-ependymal
         area in the hippocampus; (3) leptomeninges in the thalamus; and (4) choroid plexus
         in the lateral ventricle, in a total area of 1,810,120.7&nbsp;μm2. Examinations were done “blindly”, without knowledge of the experimental groups.
      
      Statistical analysis
      The differences between groups were determined by the Kruskal-Wallis test followed
         by Dunn’s multiple comparison test. Association between the diseases was analysed
         using the Fisher’s exact test, and data were submitted to Spearman correlation test.
         A value of P &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Data are expressed as the median
         (minimum - maximum), and all statistical analyses were performed using Prism 5 software
         (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA).
      
      Ethics
      This study was approved by the Institutional Ethics and Animal Welfare Committee (CEEA
         – Comissão de Ética e Experimentação Animal, UNESP – São Paulo State University, process
         number 05/06).
      
   

