Methods
   
      Research setting
      The research presented here was performed within the annual course ‘Advanced topics
         in causal research: confounding and effect modification’. This is a course within
         the MSc program Epidemiology at Utrecht University. It is a compulsory course for
         MSc Epidemiology students as well as for postgraduate MSc students (mostly PhD students)
         in Epidemiology. In the curriculum the course is scheduled at the end of a series
         of theoretical courses, just before the students start their research projects. In
         addition to the aforementioned groups of participants, the course is attended by clinicians
         with a research interest.
      
      The course focuses on two issues in epidemiology that are essential to causal research:
         confounding and effect modification. For a detailed explanation of these topics we
         refer to textbooks on epidemiology [3]. During the course, approximately half of the time was devoted to the topic of confounding
         and the other half to effect modification. There were two teachers in this course:
         one was an expert in the field of confounding, the other an expert in the field of
         effect modification.
      
      The course is a five-day course. The first four days have a similar set-up: each morning
         lectures are scheduled in which theory is discussed, while in the afternoon computer
         practicals are scheduled in which statistical software is used to clarify the theory
         discussed during the morning session. On the fifth day of the course a group assignment
         is scheduled. Each group is assigned an empirical dataset and an accompanying research
         question. The group members have to draft an analysis plan, analyse the data accordingly,
         and give a short presentation of the results of their study. At the end of the course,
         the participants have to pass a written exam.
      
      Since 2008, the course has been given annually according to the format described above.
         In 2012 the outline of the course was similar to the years before, but in addition
         course materials were developed to allow participants to follow the course through
         distance learning. In 2011, all lectures were recorded on video. The slides and the
         timeline of the lectures were added to the recordings, which allowed participants
         to go easily through the lecture or play specific parts multiple times. In addition,
         for all computer practicals a video manual was recorded, which includes a video instruction
         on using the statistical software, how to perform the exercises, where to find the
         results, and how to interpret these results. All materials were available through
         the E-learning environment on a website. Students could access the website using a
         personal code. Aside from the study materials, there was also room to post messages
         on the E-learning environment. These messages could be read by all participants as
         well as the instructors. This allowed participants to ask questions or to respond
         to questions by others. Participants could also send messages directly to the instructors,
         either through the website or email. During the 2012 course, attendance to the live
         education was not compulsory and distance learning material were made available in
         parallel with the live sessions. Hence, participants could choose to attend the live
         education, to use the learning materials provided through the internet, or both.
      
      Data collection and analysis
      All participants of the course that was given in March 2012 were asked to keep a diary
         on the number of hours they spent on course activities. They were also asked to write
         down the reasons for attending or not attending the live education (lectures or practicals).
         In addition, they were asked to fill in a questionnaire on learning styles. We used
         the Index of Learning Styles, which was developed by Felder and Soloman [4]. The Index of Learning Styles makes a distinction between four domains of learning
         (active-reflective, sensing-intuitive, visual-verbal, and sequential-global). The
         questionnaire consists of 44 questions, 11 for each domain. For each participant the
         answers to the questionnaire were categorized to indicate which was the predominant
         learning style in each of the four domains. All questionnaires were answered voluntarily
         and anonymized before they were collected. Therefore, we were unable to link the results
         of the exam to e.g. attendance of live or distance education or learning styles. The
         study was approved by the NVMO Ethical Review Board (NERB dossier number 261).
      
   

