Methods
   
      GEO data retrieval, microarray normalization and ensemble mapping
      The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ webcite) is a public repository of various genetic high through put data sources. Microarray
         data sets for different chips types are deposited with extensive experimental design
         and information and with normalized and/or raw data. We set our experimental criteria
         specific to postmortem human hippocampal samples analyzed using an Affymetrix platform.
         Our search obtained two GEO data sets, GSE5281 and GSE28146 (we only utilized the
         arrays from severe AD patients from this study), which contained CA1 region specific
         individual hippocampal neurons data. The appropriate control and AD raw CEL files
         were downloaded from the GEO site. Next the CEL files were read into the R programming
         console using the affy package 
         					[89] (this and other R-based tools were obtained from the open source Bioconductor bioinformatics
         software, http://www.bioconductor.org webcite). In the uploading process CDF files were associated with the microarrays through
         the GeneMapper package. Downloaded from GATExplorer 
         					[89-91] GeneMapper (http://bioinfow.dep.usal.es/xgate/mapping/mapping.php webcite) includes the sets of unambiguous probes that map to each specific Ensemble Gene
         ID (ENSG ID). Also through affy package, the intensity files were normalized using
         Robust Multichip Average, RMA. A three-step process, RMA performs a background adjustment,
         quantile normalization and final summarization 
         					[92].
      
      Ethics
      The data utilized were obtained from a research repository databank (GEO), involves
         decedents, contains no personal identifiers, and the authors had no role in the collection
         or storage of these data.
      
      RankProd
      The R RankProd package contains functions for differential gene expression analysis
         of microarrays based on a non-parametric statistic 
         					[93]. RankProd identifies genes that are consistently highly ranked amount a list of genes.
         Since the method exploits the rank of genes not the actual expression value, it can
         be flexibly applied to many different questions, such as identifying genes.
      
      It assumes that under the null hypothesis the order of genes are random and statistically
         probabilities are based on the probability of a particular ranking. Rank product is
         the multiplication of these probabilities. RankProd produces a list of up- or down-
         regulated genes with false discovery rate (FDR). RankProd also has the ability to
         combine data sets from different origins into a single meta-analysis to increase the
         power of the identification 
         					[93].
      
      Ingenuity pathway analysis
      IPA is commercially available software (Ingenuity Systems, Inc., Redwood City, CA)
         for several types of analysis and is popular in a variety of biological fields/studies.
         IPA utilizes a large, well-designed knowledge base and enables functional, canonical
         pathway and network analysis. IPA uses its knowledge base to better understand how
         the data fit with the curated functional, canonical pathway, and interaction network
         information. We utilized the Functional Analysis tool to identify the biological functions
         and/or diseases that were most significant to the data set. Molecules from the dataset
         were associated with biological functions and/or diseases in the Ingenuity Knowledge
         Base were considered for the analysis. Right-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to
         calculate a p-value determining the probability that each biological function and/or
         disease assigned to that data set is due to chance alone.
      
      Genes2Networks
      A publically available bioinformatics database, Genes2Networks (http://actin.pharm.mssm.edu/genes2networks/ webcite) is hub of databases used to find relationships between genes and proteins from seed
         lists 
         					[94]. Predictions of genes or proteins that may play crucial roles in pathways or protein
         complexes are supplemented to the seed list. Gene2Networks calculates a Z statistic
         using a binomial proportions test on the significance of a supplemented protein in
         the output sub network.
      
      Cytoscape plugins
      Cytoscape, a popular publically available bioinformatics package (http://www.cytoscape.org webcite), represents networks, with biological entities as nodes and biological interactions
         as edges between nodes 
         					[95]. Plugins are designed to run several types of analysis. Before plugins are applied
         all satellite networks are removed leaving a single interconnected network of nodes.
         This study uses two such plugins, CentiScaPe and MCODE.
      
      CentiScaPe
      CentiScaPe is an interface to analyze topology of protein-protein interaction networks
         
         					[96]. CentiScaPe uses a variety of graph theory centrality measurements to determine and
         develop sub networks. In this study we used the following:
      
      Eccentricity
      Eccentricity computes the shortest paths between a single node and all other nodes
         in the graph. Next the longest shortest path is chosen and the reciprocal is taken.
         Higher value represent nodes that have the shortest paths, meaning all other nodes
         are in its proximity. All other proteins within the network easily reach proteins
         with high eccentricity. Thus, a protein with high eccentricity dictates functional
         directions, but also is subjected to functional control by binding partners. On the
         opposite end, a low eccentricity suggests a peripheral functional role.
      
      Closeness
      Closeness computes the shortest path between a single node and all other nodes. The
         summation is taken of the shortest paths and the reciprocal is taken. Nodes with high
         closeness are in close proximity to all other nodes in the network. If the closeness
         measure is low, all other nodes are distant from this node. Closeness measurements
         can also reflect few nodes that are very close or distant from a specific node. Therefore
         closeness is not specific to the nature of the node couples and should be compared
         with eccentricity and radiality. In relation to PPI networks, closeness can represent
         functionally and points of competition between proteins.
      
      Radiality
      Radiality is calculated similarly to closeness, but subtracts the diameter of the
         graph from each path. This value is then summated and finally divided by the number
         of nodes minus 1. Short paths have high radiality values where as long paths have
         low values. With respect to the diameter high radiality nodes are closer to other
         nodes. In PPI networks radiality can represent functional relevancy between a single
         protein and other proteins and functional directional control.
      
      MCODE
      Another plugin used Molecular Complex Detection, MCODE, formulates clusters within
         a network 
         					[97]. MCODE, a theoretic clustering algorithm, identifies densely connected areas in large
         protein-protein interaction networks that could suggest protein complexes. MCODE is
         built on vertex weighting by local neighborhood density and outward crossing from
         a locally dense protein isolating the dense regions according to user specific parameters.
         
         					[97] MCODEv1.32 was used for cluster identification among the proteins with the two sub
         networks.
      
      MetaCore
      MetaCore is commercially available software (GeneGo, Thompson Reuters, New York, NY)
         for functional analysis of high throughput data. For this study we focused on using
         the Disease (by biomarker) analysis. MetaCore bases disease ontology on classifications
         in Medical Subject headings. Each disease has a corresponding biomarker gene or sets
         of genes and p-value statistic based on the probability of a random intersection of
         two different gene sets. The p-value of the intersection between an experimental gene
         and ontology is considered as a measure of relevance of said ontology to the experimental
         dataset.
      
      The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID)
      DAVID is a publically available database (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov webcite) that offers a comprehensive set of functional annotation tools to recognize biological
         meaning behind list from high through put experiments. For this study we focused on
         using the disease information in the Genetic Association Database curated within DAVID’s
         functional analysis. The statistics used for predicted disease ontologies are p-values
         using Fisher’s exact test.. Each statistical measure corresponds to the probability
         of one or more genes overlapping with the predicted disease ontology.
      
   

