Methods
   
      We searched Medline (1950 to present), EMBASE (1947 to present), Scopus (1823 to present),
         CINAHL (1937 to present) and Global health (1910 to present). Results were limited
         to peer-reviewed publications in English. Search terms and Medical Subject Headings
         (MeSH) for nosocomial organisms and antibiotic resistance were combined with search
         and MeSH terms for healthcare settings and mathematical models as follows:
      
      •Nosocomial infections in general (e.g.”healthcare-associated infection$” or “hospital-acquired infection$”)
      
      OR
      •Nosocomial organisms (e.g. “C. difficile” or “Staphylococcus aureus”)OR Antimicrobial resistance AND Nosocomial (e.g. “hospital$” or “healthcare”)
      
      AND
      •Mathematical modelling or economic evaluation model (e.g. “stochastic” or “deterministic”AND“model”)
      We decided not to use search terms for nosocomial infection types (e.g. surgical site
         infections or urinary tract infections), since our review focuses on the transmission
         of infections from one individual to another, which cannot generally be accurately
         represented without knowing the causative organism.
      
      The complete search strategy is provided in the Additional file 1. All databases were search identically, with exception of the MeSH terms, which were
         altered to the subject-heading dictionary used in each particular database. The final
         search was conducted on 11 December 2011. Each title and abstract in the search result
         was independently screened by EvK and at least one of the other authors. Full text
         evaluation was conducted by EvK and in case of uncertainty, discussion took place
         with JR.
      
      Additional file 1. Search terms MEDLINE.
         	Format: DOCX 
         	Size: 82KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Inclusion criteria
      Eligible studies had to fulfil the following criteria: 1) mathematical modelling of
         HCAI transmission and/or the dynamics of antimicrobial resistance; 2) dynamic transmission
         models only (i.e. a model which tracks the number of individuals (or proportion of
         a population) carrying or infected with a pathogen over time, while capturing the
         effect of contact between individuals on transmission [9]); 3) a primary focus on HCAI transmission in healthcare settings.
      
      Exclusion criteria
      Studies were excluded if they did not involve: 1) human to human transmission; or
         did involve 2) within host transmission only; 3) pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics
         of drugs (e.g. the impact of antibiotic exposure, exploring antibiotic tolerance and
         investigating fitness), 4) animal transmission of HCAI; 5) community transmission
         of pathogens spread in the healthcare environment as well, where community spread
         was the focus of the paper (e.g. SARS epidemics); or 6) literature review without
         new primary studies. Moreover, no editorials or letters to editors were included,
         except if a new mathematical model was introduced.
      
   

