Methods
   
      Genomes
      We retrieved the annotated transcripts of 2,023 bacterial genomes available from NCBI
         on August 2012 (http://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/ webcite). We excluded from the analyses organisms that reassign stop codons, and for the
         remaining 1,976 organisms we removed incomplete or ambiguous transcripts.
      
      Codon usage analysis
      Previous analyses [1,3] tried to verify the Ambush Hypothesis by correlating the usage of each codon with
         the number of ways in which the codon can form an OSC – from 0 to 6 ways (Figure&nbsp;1). Both analyses used the CUTG (Codon Usage Tabulated from GenBank) database to determine
         the usage of each codon in different organisms and did a linear regression to determine
         the correlation coefficient between codon usage and the number of ways in which it
         can form an OSC.
      
      We replicate these analyses [1,3] using 1,976 fully sequenced bacterial genomes. Instead of using the CUTG database,
         we calculate the codon usage for each organism by directly analyzing the transcripts
         in the GenBank annotation. GC content for each organism was also calculated from the
         transcripts. We grouped each codon based on the number of ways it can form an OSC.
         Note that we do not include stop codons themselves in this analysis as none occur
         in-frame in the coding region. Subsequently, using the average codon usage of each
         genome, we calculated the correlation (Spearman’s rank coefficient) between codon
         bias and potential to form OSCs.
      
      Excesses of OSCs in fully sequenced bacterial genomes
      We counted the number of OSCs in the +1 and +2 frames for each organism directly from
         available transcripts. These corresponded to our observed values, the true number
         of OSCs in each organism. To produce expected values of OSCs, we used the same two
         Markov models described in [4] to create artificial sequences that preserved the fundamental structure of the genome.
         These models have been used before to successfully identify microbial genes [14,15].
      
      For each organism, we used the complete transcriptome to train our Markov model. The
         terminating stop codon was removed before training so that stop codons would not be
         inserted into our artificial genome in frame, as this does not occur biologically
         and would bias the calculation of the expected frequency of OSCs. The transition matrix
         generated this way contained the probability of each nucleotide following a given
         dinucleotide or pentanucleotide, which were used to parameterize the second and fifth
         order models.
      
      To generate the artificial sequences, we initiate each artificial transcript using
         the first two or five nucleotides of the natural transcript and then use the probabilities
         dictated in the transition matrix to add nucleotides one by one, ending when the artificial
         transcript was an equivalent length to the natural transcript. We then counted the
         number of OSCs in the entire artificial genome. We repeated this 200 times for each
         organism to calculate an average expected value. Increasing the number of repetitions
         did not affect the average significantly. These expected counts were compared to the
         actual values.
      
      We repeated this procedure using one codon at a time to calculate the overrepresentation
         with which each codon appeared off-frame in the transcripts of the genomes analyzed.
         For each organism, after calculating both the expected and the observed off-frame
         frequencies for the three stop codons and for all 64 codons individually, we quantified
         the over- or under-representation of a codon (or stop codons) using the natural log
         of the ratio of the number of observed off-frame codons over the average number of
         predicted off-frame codons. If this log-ratio was negative, then there were less off-frame
         codons than expected. If it was positive, then there were more off-frame codons than
         expected. A log ratio was used because it removes the inherent bias of ratios towards
         higher values.
      
      There were minor differences between our basic analysis and that of [4]: Before training their Markov model, Tse et al. removed any transcript less than
         100 amino acids long. We found this cutoff arbitrary and included all transcripts.
         They also limited their analysis to one species per genus to prevent oversampling
         [4]. Given the large number of organisms available to us, we did not trim our dataset,
         reasoning that the dangers of oversampling were less important and less likely to
         occur than the inadvertent introduction of bias. All analyses were performed using
         Python scripts. Source code is available upon request.
      
   

