Methods
   
      The setting
      Selection of sites
      The importance of geography as both an equity marker [8] and the key parameter used by governments for planning, budgeting and delivery of
         health services justified the choice of disadvantaged locations as the unit of analysis.
         Time and logistical constraints prevented us from undertaking this work in a large
         number of sites. With the understanding that many health system constraints are by
         nature common across sites with similar typologies, policymakers in devolved settings
         opted to pilot Investment Cases in a few locations representative of “typical” disadvantaged
         sub-national units. Different criteria were used in each country. In the Philippines,
         two provinces from the Eastern Visayas region with high mortality were chosen. Due
         to the concerns of policymakers with the urban-poor, a city was also included in the
         analysis. In Indonesia, two rural and two urban sites with poor coverage of MNCH interventions
         were selected. In Orissa, government officials chose two districts with large disadvantaged
         populations, one predominantly tribal and one prone to natural disasters. In the centralised
         health system of Nepal, the reality of health services delivery dictates that the
         strategies needed to scale up services in the populous plains (terai) regions, are
         different to those required for the hills and remote mountainous districts. Therefore
         groups of districts with low intervention coverage were chosen, which were representative
         of the different ecological regions. Table&nbsp;1 provides key characteristics and demographics of the sites selected in each country.
      
      Table 1. Key characteristics and demographics of investment case study sites
      The design of the study
      Problem solving workshops
      Problem solving workshops with key stakeholders at different levels of the health
         system were undertaken to identify the root cause of the scaling-up constraints in
         disadvantaged locations, formulate pragmatic strategies to address them and set realistic
         coverage targets. In order to facilitate the discussions at the problem solving workshops,
         we adopted the bottlenecks framework originally developed by Tanahashi [9] and further refined by UNICEF and the World Bank [10]. This framework helps policymakers to systematically unpack the constraints to six
         determinants of health coverage all of which inhibit the ability of the system to
         increase the uptake of priority interventions. These constraints are classified according
         to supply (physical access to health services, availability of human resources, and
         availability of critical inputs), demand (first use of health services, and continuous
         use) and quality. Health interventions are seldom delivered in isolation. These determinants
         are thus examined for twelve interventions that act as proxies for other health services
         sharing a similar platform of delivery. Figure&nbsp;1 shows the example of a bottlenecks chart used to identify health system constraints
         for Antenatal care in the Hills Cluster of districts, Nepal.
      
      Figure 1. Bottlenecks chart – Antenatal Care - Hills cluster, Nepal.
      Results from the problem solving workshops have been validated by expert groups in
         all countries, particularly to ensure the feasibility of strategies and increased
         coverage targets within the wider regulatory environment. The extent to which these
         strategies were incorporated into the plans and budgets in our study sites is detailed
         elsewhere [7].
      
      Estimating costs and impact – the decision--support model
      A cohort model was developed for this project to estimate the expected costs and impact
         of scaling-up strategies. The supplementary material includes a brief overview of
         the approach with conceptual diagrams of the basic model structure (Additional file
         1). The full methods and calculations of the model are described in detail elsewhere
         and are available as unpublished observations upon request. In brief, the model tracks
         an annual cohort of pregnant women until birth and follows the live births until age
         5.0 years.
      
      Additional file 1. Supplementary material 1. Decision-support tool.
         	Format: DOC 
         	Size: 71KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Word Viewer
      The model incorporates coverage, efficacy, and costing data for the 66 interventions
         involved in this analysis for which there are global estimates of their impact on
         the burden of maternal, newborn, and child mortality [11]. These interventions are organised into four phases (pre-pregnancy, pregnancy to
         birth, birth to age 1 month, age 1 month to 5 years) along the continuum of care starting
         with family planning and pregnancy-related interventions through to immunisation and
         curative health services for under fives. The population at-risk at the start of each
         phase is dependent on the coverage of interventions in the preceding phase. The methods
         for the estimation of intervention impact (% reduction in maternal, neonatal and under-five
         mortality) were adapted from the Lives Saved Tool (LiST) [12]. Deaths are first distributed into the major defined causes, then reduced by the
         cause-specific effectiveness (efficacy x marginal increase in coverage) of each intervention.
         Where more than one intervention targets a specific cause of death, impact is calculated
         sequentially to prevent over-estimation of deaths prevented.
      
      Methods for modelling the coverage targets generated in the problem solving workshops
         and costing the strategies associated with these targets were adapted from the Marginal
         Budgeting for Bottlenecks (MBB) tool [10]. The costs and benefits of new strategies to scale-up MNCH interventions are calculated
         by comparing the new strategy to the current programme (status quo) in the population
         of interest.
      
      The objective of the modelling process in the context of this study is to support
         decentralised decision-making for health planning and budgeting in low-income settings.
         For these purposes, the model aims at providing policymakers with the information
         required to assess the relative merits and costs of the scaling-up strategies discussed
         during the workshops. The model thus estimates financial rather than economic costs,
         which can then be used to produce sub-national budgets. To facilitate the understanding
         of budgetary implications, annual recurrent costs are assumed to be the same in each
         of the next five years. Capital costs are not annualised and are assumed to be incurred
         in the first year of the programme. Modified costing calculations provide both total
         and incremental costs. Costs are produced at baseline which allows policymakers to
         verify results when compared to actual expenditure. Both direct inputs into MNCH services
         and more general health system improvements are included in the costing calculations.
         As the burden of mortality in targeted areas is high, and the efficacy of most interventions
         on morbidity are not well established, the model only considers deaths prevented rather
         than other measures of health benefit. The primary outcome measures used to compare
         alternative strategies are the financial cost per death averted and the financial
         cost per capita. The time horizon of the model is a single budgeted year so future
         costs and effects are undiscounted.
      
      The model was developed in Excel [13] as it was critical to have a transparent model developed in software familiar to
         sub-national partners engaged in the process. There is a logical stepwise progression
         through the model from coverage to impact and costs (see Webfigures 2–5 in Additional
         file 1). Inputs have been standardised and the design is fully customisable. For example,
         users can: (i) specify which level of coverage local estimates refer to i.e. initial
         utilisation, continuous coverage, effective quality coverage; (ii) define up to six
         health service delivery levels; (iii) organise the way interventions are grouped for
         the purposes of bottleneck analysis and coverage target setting; (iv) add new user-defined
         cost items; and (v) customise the budget to reflect local terminology and cost categories.
      
      Due to the complexity of an analysis that combines qualitative and quantitative methods
         for an entire MNCH programme, we were unable to do a traditional uncertainty analysis.
         The model instead includes a built-in facility for univariate sensitivity analysis
         for a small number of important parameters. For example, the expected increase in
         intervention coverage is highly uncertain, yet has a large influence on costs and
         numbers of deaths prevented. For the purposes of this analysis, uncertainty ranges
         therefore reflect the sensitivity of the results to a −/+ 10% change in the intervention
         coverage targets.
      
      The results of the country Investment Cases are discussed below. Tables&nbsp;2, 3, 4 and 5 present causes of death, summaries of key strategies, and results for each of our
         study sites by country at the end of the five-year timeframe of the analysis. Costs
         are presented as marginal (additional) per capita costs of strategies in United States
         Dollars (USD), by early capital (one-off) costs and annual recurrent costs. Impact
         of scenarios are reported as reductions in neonatal mortality rate (NMR), under-five
         mortality rate (U5MR), and maternal mortality ratio (MMR) with point estimates and
         upper and lower bounds calculated assuming −/+ 10% of intervention coverage targets
         determined by policymakers.
      
      Table 2. Results of impact and cost of investment case analysis in Philippines
      Table 3. Results of impact and cost of investment case analysis in Indonesia
      Table 4. Results of impact and cost of investment case analysis in Orissa (India)
      Table 5. Results of impact and cost of investment case analysis in Nepal
   

