Methods
   
      Design
      A cross-sectional study using a customised questionnaire was conducted with a single
         cohort of SLP university students.
      
      Participants and setting
      Participants were a convenience sample of students completing an entry level SLP degree
         recruited from a single university site. The students were either undergraduate students
         or graduate entry masters students. Students in these two SLP entry level degrees
         complete comparable coursework. The graduate entry master’s program requires students
         to complete pre-requisite subjects comparable to 1st year undergraduate SLP subjects
         prior to enrolment in the graduate entry masters program. The graduate entry masters
         program then utilizes a ‘summer semester’ to enable three semesters of coursework
         to be completed within each calendar year (whereas undergraduate students complete
         two semesters and then have a long summer break). So while students’ from the undergraduate
         and postgraduate entry level programs were included in the sample, they were all at
         a comparable stage in their entry level training; which covers the same SLP related
         coursework.
      
      Students from these entry level programs that were enrolled in the acquired adult
         neurogenic language disorders subject were invited to participate. A total of 126
         students were enrolled in the subject, and all students were invited to complete the
         voluntary survey; 49 (38.9%) students consented to participate in this investigation.
         This subject contained a compulsory aphasia coursework component, which was attended
         by all students. The aphasia component of the subject consisted of 12 × 2&nbsp;hour lectures
         (24&nbsp;hours in total) focusing on theory including the assessment, differential diagnosis,
         clinical management (including goal setting, acute management and the World Health
         Organisation’s International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
         model (WHO) [23]; rather than practical interactions with individuals with acquired language disorders.
         As part of this coursework, the students received a single lecture by an individual
         with chronic mild aphasia. Therefore, participating students had attended lectures
         about aphasia as part of their routine academic coursework, but had not participated
         in clinical education placements with PWA. Students were selected from this point
         in their entry level education program to ensure they had appropriate theoretical
         understanding of aphasia, but not real life clinical practice experience. There were
         no other inclusion or exclusion criteria. At the Australian university setting for
         this investigation, students do receive clinical exposure as part of their academic
         coursework. However, the students participating in this investigation had not yet
         completed clinical placements in the clinical situations that expose students to PWA.
      
      Questionnaire
      A self-report questionnaire with three short sections was developed for the purposes
         of the study based on information from Connect – The Communication Disability Network
         in the United Kingdom. The first section recorded demographic and background information
         (gender, age, degree enrolment and prior contact with PWA). The second section asked
         participants to rate their confidence in communicating with PWA by marking (drawing)
         a vertical line on a horizontal 100&nbsp;mm visual analogue rating scale (Figure&nbsp;1) with anchors of Not at all confident (0) through to Very confident (100). The third section was an open ended question that asked participants to: Please describe specific strategies that could be used in clinical settings to assist
            communication between health professional and PWA.
      Figure 1. The 100&nbsp;mm visual analogue scale for rating confidence in communicating with people
            with aphasia; scale anchors were “Not confident at all (0)” and “Very confident (100)”.
      Procedure
      Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Metro South Health Service District
         Human Research Ethics Committee and The University of Queensland Medical Research
         Ethics Committee. The students were recruited during a brief presentation about the
         study by one member of the research team at the end of one of their aphasia lectures
         (to minimise any potential conflict of interest the member of the research team was
         not involved in the coordination or teaching of the subject). The students were informed
         that participation in the study was voluntary, that it would have no influence upon
         their subject grade, and did not contribute towards course credit. Any student who
         was interested in participating in the study was given the questionnaire, study information
         sheet and consent form by the research team member. Written informed consent was obtained
         from all participants prior to their participation. Consenting students completed
         the self-report questionnaire and returned the questionnaire to a member of the research
         team.
      
      Analysis
      Quantitative analysis was undertaken using Stata IC and SPSS software packages. Demographic
         information was described using conventional descriptive statistics. To investigate
         whether enrolment in the undergraduate versus graduate entry masters program was associated
         with confidence ratings, a logistic regression was undertaken. Similarly, a linear
         regression was undertaken to investigate whether an association between the age of
         participants and their confidence rating existed. Confidence rating visual analogue
         scale data were described using median and inter-quartile range (IQR). Additionally
         a frequency histogram was used to examine the distribution of the confidence rating
         scale responses (Figure&nbsp;2). Thematic analysis was used to describe the nature of qualitative written responses
         for potential strategies that could be used when communicating with PWA [24-28]. For the thematic analysis, two members of the research team independently coded
         each phrase listed by the students under emerging response categories (e.g., “slow
         down rate” and ”reduce rate” were both coded into the response category “reduced rate
         of speech”). These response categories were then aligned under emerging themes (e.g.,
         “reduced rate of speech” was aligned under “verbal communication strategies’). A third
         independent researcher was available to arbitrate any unresolved disagreement between
         the two primary coders, but was not required (as no unresolved discrepancy between
         the first two coders occurred). The number of potential strategies identified by each
         respondent was also recorded. Additionally, the number of coded phrases in each response
         category was summed as a gross indicator of the most prominent strategies or resources
         reported by the students. In addition to describing the nature of the listed strategies,
         two experienced SLP members of the research team classified each strategy into one
         of two suitability categories (Table&nbsp;1 and Table&nbsp;2). Strategies considered likely to be suitable based on previous literature [25,29-33] and the coders’ professional experience are displayed in Table&nbsp;1. The remaining response strategies were judged to be of uncertain benefit or insufficiently
         described to determine potential suitability by the experienced SLP team members and
         were listed separately (Table&nbsp;2). For example, a listed strategy of “technology” was not considered a clear strategy
         description and was therefore assigned to Table&nbsp;2. However, a description of using “images via an ipad” would have been considered
         to be a potentially suitable strategy and would have been allocated to Table&nbsp;1.
      
      Figure 2. Frequency histogram of student (n = 49) visual analogue scale confidence ratings.
      Table 1. Thematic analysis of potential strategies suggested by the students for communicating
            with PWA, and the number of times (n) strategies were coded to each response category
      Table 2. Strategies of uncertain benefit or insufficiently described to determine potential
            suitability
   

