Methods
   
      Reagents and chemicals
      Fluoroisothiocyanate (FITC)- labeled CD16, CD3, perforin, granzyme B, and phycoerytherin
         (PE)-labeled CD56 and IL-2 neutralizing MQ1-17H12 monoclonal antibodies, GolgiStop™
         solution and Perm/Wash™ solution were purchased from BD, USA; isotype control mouse
         IgG1 and FITC goat anti-rabbit Ig were purchased from Abcam, USA; Enzyme Link Immunosorbent
         Assay (ELISA) kit for IFN-γ, TNF-α and Granzyme B cytokines from Bender MedSystems,
         Austria; NK cell and T cell isolation kits from Milteny Biotech, Germany; human recombinant
         human Interleukin 2 (rhIL-2), trypan blue solution, DMEM were brought from Sigma,
         USA.
      
      Preparation of the methanol extract of R. korthalsii
      R. korthalsii methanol extract was prepared using the same extraction method as stated in our earlier
         study [9]. R. korthalsii leaves (voucher no: FRIM 33687) were collected from Georgetown Herbal Farm, Penang,
         Malaysia and was authenticated by Mr. Lim Chung Lu from the Forestry Division of the
         Forest Research Institute of Malaysia (Kepong, Selangor). The leaves were then air-dried
         and extracted using 250 mL of methanol (J.T. Baker, USA) for 72 hours. The extract
         was filtered with Whatman filter paper no 1 and evaporated to dryness under reduced
         pressure using Aspirator A-3S (EYELA, Japan) at &lt; 40°C. This process was repeated
         three times (yield 27.3%, w/w) respectively. The methanol extract was dissolved in
         DMSO (Sigma, USA) at a concentration of 10 mg/mL.
      
      Cell line and cell preparation
      PBMC was isolated from five different blood donors using Ficoll-Plaque Plus (Amersham
         Biosciences, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Informed consent was acquired
         from all donors and this work was carried out in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration
         for ethical approaches of conducting scientific research. This study was approved
         by the ethical committee of University Putra Malaysia. In brief, one ratio of diluted
         blood (1:1 ratio in PBS) sample was layered on 2 ratio of Ficoll-Plaque Plus (Amersham
         Biosciences, USA), pelleted (400 g, 40 minutes at 18-20°C) and the buffy coat was collected, washed twice with PBS and
         cultured in DMEM (Sigma, USA) (100 IU/mL of penicillin, 100 μg/mL of streptomycin
         [Flowlab, Australia] and 10% v/v Fetal Bovine Serum [FBS] [PAA, Austria]). PBMC with
         viability higher than 90% was subjected to the following assays.
      
      T cell and NK cell immunophenotyping for human PBMC
      The T cell and NK population in the control and extract treated PBMC were identified
         using flow cytometry surface antigen immunophenotyping. In brief, PBMC (5 × 105 cells/mL) was exposed to various concentrations of R. korthalsii methanol extract (50 μg/mL, 25 μg/mL or 1 μg/mL) for 24, 48 and 72 hours. Con-A (1
         μg/mL) and LPS (1 μg/mL) treated PBMC and untreated PBMC were used as positive and
         negative controls respectively. All samples were then washed, double stained with
         10 μg/10 μL of conjugated anti-CD3 FITC (isotype control: Mouse IgG2a κ) and 12.5
         μg/10 μL of conjugated anti-CD56 PE antibodies (isotype control: Mouse IgG1 κ) and
         the population of CD3+ T cell and CD56+ NK cell were analyzed using BD FACSCalibur™ flow cytometer with BD CellQuest™ software
         (BD Biosciences, USA).
      
      NK cell Granzyme B and perforin expressions
      PBMC was treated with R. korthalsii extract at 25 μg/mL or rhIL-2 at 200 U/mL for 72 hours in 6 well plate (BD Biosciences,
         USA). 2 hours before the end of the incubation period, the production of perforin
         and granzyme B were inhibited by adding and mixing with 2 μL of BD GolgiStop™ into
         each experimental well. Then, 1 × 106 cells were harvested, washed with 1 mL of PBS and stained with 12.5 μg/10 μL of conjugated
         anti-CD 56-PE antibody in a final volume of 100 μL PBS for 30 minutes at 4°C. After
         that, the cells were washed and incubated with 250 μL of Fixation/Permeabilization
         solution (BD Biosciences, USA) for 20 minutes at 4°C. Subsequently, the cells were
         then washed twice with BD Perm/Wash™ buffer, incubated with 5 μL of either 10 μg/10
         μL of mouse anti-human Granzyme B-FITC (Isotype control: Mouse IgG1, κ) (BD Biosciences,
         USA) or 10 μg/10 μL of mouse anti-human Perforin-FITC antibody (Isotype control: Mouse
         IgG2b, κ) (BD Biosciences, USA), stained with second antibodies and analyzed using
         BD FACSCalibur™ flow cytometer with BD CellQuest™ software (BD Biosciences, USA).
      
      NK cell Isolation
      The PBMC was subjected to activation and treatment as stated below and summarised
         in Figure&nbsp;1.
      
      Group 1: non-treated PBMC was cultured for 72 hours and subjected to NK cell magnetic
         isolation
      
      Group 2: PBMC was treated with 200 IU/mL of human rIL-2 treated for 72 hours before
         subjected to NK cell isolation
      
      Group 3: Direct NK cells activation whereby freshly isolated PBMC was subjected to
         NK cell isolation and was further cultured in 25 μg/mL of R. korthalsii methanol extract for 72 hours.
      
      Group 4: Indirect NK cell activation whereby PBMC was treated with 25 μg/mL of R. korthalsii methanol extract for 72 hours before subjected to NK cell magnetic isolation.
      
      Figure 1. Brief description of NK cells treatment. G1 to G4 are the groups of treatment. Direct and indirect activations of R. korthalsii against NK cells were studied through isolation of NK cells before and after 72-hour
         incubation with the extract.
      
      NK cell isolation kit by immunomagnetic negative selection (Milteny Biotech, Germany)
         was used to isolate primary NK cells from isolated PBMC. In brief, either the freshly
         isolated PBMC (for direct R. korthalsii methanol extract treatment) or the PBMC cultured 3 days with different treatment
         was magnetically labeled with a cocktail of NK cell Biotin-Antibody Cocktail followed
         by NK cell MicroBead Cocktail. The magnetically labeled cells were then separated
         using MS column in the magnetic field of the MACS separator. Purity of NK cells was
         quantified by using flow cytometry where the entire isolated NK cell was labeled with
         anti-CD16-FITC (isotype control: Mouse IgG1 κ), anti-CD-56-PE (isotype control: Mouse
         IgG1 κ) and analyzed by flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, USA). Isolated NK cell with
         purity more than 95% were used for further studies.
      
      ELISA for determination of extra-cellular Granzyme B, IFN-γ and TNF-α
      Expressions of Granzyme B, IFN-γ and TNF-α were performed using Cytokine Enzyme Link
         Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) kit (Bender MedSystems, Austria). In brief, the extracted
         human NK cells after 72 hours of different treatments were cultured for another 24
         hours without treatment. Another group of direct and indirect extract treated NK cells
         were treated with 15 μg/mL of MQ1-17H12 antibody (BD, USA) to neutralize the activity
         of IL-2 contributed mainly by the surrounding cell especially in the indirect extract
         treated NK cell. Similarly, CD3 T cells were isolated using CD3 T cell isolation kit
         by immunomagnetic positive selection based on the same grouping for the NK cell in
         Figure&nbsp;1. The supernatant of these different control and treatment groups of T cell were subjected
         to ELISA determination of extra-cellular Granzyme B, IFN-γ and TNF-α levels and compared
         their effects with the treatments on the NK cell. The supernatant from each group
         was collected, added into the pre-coated plate of the kit and incubated for 3 hours.
         After that, these samples were washed and immediately added with 3,3′,5,5″-tetramethylbenzidine
         (TMB) Peroxidase substrate followed by 1 M Phosphoric acid stop solution. The ELISA
         plate was read at absorbance OD of 450 and 620 nm wavelengths using a μQuant ELISA
         Reader (Bio-Tek Instruments, USA). The results were expressed in pg/mL. Each experimental
         and control sample was assayed in three biological replicates. Data were expressed
         as pg/mL.
      
      In vitro cytotoxicity of NK cell on NK cell sensitive K562 cell line
      
      The cytotoxicity of effector NK cell towards target K562 cell in the ratio of 2:1
         and 10:1 for 24 hours was determined using CytoTox 96 nonradioactive cytotoxicity
         assay kit (Promega, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The percentage
         of cytotoxicity was calculated using the formula below
      
      
         
               
                  
                     %
                     
                     Cytotoxicity
                     =
                     
                        
                           OD
                           
                           sample
                           -
                           OD
                           
                           target
                           
                           spontaneous
                           -
                           OD
                           
                           effector
                           
                           spontaneous
                        
                        
                           OD
                           
                           target
                           
                           spontaneous
                           -
                           OD
                           
                           effector
                           
                           spontaneous
                        
                     
                     ×
                     100
                  
               
         
      
      Statistical analysis
      All tests were carried out with 3 independent experiments and each of the experiment
         consisted of 3 technical replicates. All results are expressed as Mean ± Standard
         Error (S.E.M.). Significant levels (p &lt; 0.05) were evaluated using ANOVA test (one
         way) followed by post hoc Duncan test.
      
   

