Methods
   
      Venom-gland transcriptome sequencing
      We followed the approach of Rokyta et al. [17] for the preparation and sequencing of the venom gland. We sequenced RNA from the
         venom glands of an adult female C. horridus from Bradford County, Florida. The animal weighed 1,134.7 g with a snout-to-vent
         length of 108 cm and a total length of 116 cm. We stimulated transcription in the
         glands by means of venom extraction under anesthesia [100]. The snake was anesthetized with a propofol injection (10 mg/kg) and exposure to
         isoflurane gas, and venom expulsion was initiated by means of electrostimulation.
         After allowing four days for transcription to be maximized [101], the animal was euthanized by injection of sodium pentobarbitol (100 mg/kg), and
         its venom glands were removed and transferred into RNAlater. The above techniques
         were approved by the Florida State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
         (IACUC) under protocol #0924.
      
      Sequencing and nonnormalized cDNA library preparation were performed by the HudsonAlpha
         Institute for Biotechnology Genomic Services Laboratory (http://www.hudsonalpha.org/gsl/ webcite). Transcriptome sequencing was performed essentially as described by Mortazavi et
         al. [63] in a modification of the standard Illumina methods described in detail in Bentley
         et al. [102]. Total RNA was reduced to poly-A+ RNA with oligo-dT beads. Two rounds of poly-A+
         selection were performed. The purified mRNA was then subjected to a mild heat fragmentation
         followed by random priming for first-strand synthesis. Standard second-strand synthesis
         was followed by standard library preparation with the double-stranded cDNA as input
         material. This approach is similar to that of Illumina’s TruSeq RNA-seq library preparation
         kit. Sequencing was performed in one lane on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 with 100-base-pair
         paired-end reads.
      
      Transcriptome assembly
      We followed the iterative transcriptome assembly approach of Rokyta et al. [17]. The majority of our read pairs had overlapping 3’ ends, so we merged these pairs
         into longer composite reads and updated their phred quality scores accordingly [17,51]. We also checked for and deleted any adapter sequences. Only these long, high-quality
         merged reads were used for assembly. We first eliminated extremely high-abundance
         transcripts by running the Extender program as a de novo assembler on a set of 1,000 random reads, as described by Rokyta et al. [17]. Full-length coding sequences were identified with blastx searches as described below.
         The resulting unique sequences were used as templates in a reference-based assembly
         with NGen3.1 with a 98% minimum match percentage. Ten million of the unassembled (i.e.,
         unfiltered) reads were used in a de novo transcriptome assembly with NGen3.1 with the default settings for high-stringency,
         de novo transcriptome assembly for long Illumina reads, including default quality trimming.
         The high-stringency setting corresponded to a minimum match percentage of 93%, and
         we retained contigs comprising ≥200 reads. Any resulting contigs with full-length
         coding sequences were identified by means of blastx searches (see below). We performed
         two more iterative rounds of this filtering and de novo NGen assembly to yield the final set of contigs. We checked for duplicates by assembling
         all of the contigs with the SeqMan module of the DNAStar Lasergene software suite.
         We had several levels of quality control to prevent sequencing errors from being incorporated
         into our final sequences. We only used reads that passed Illumina’s quality filter
         and that were merged into overlapping, composite reads. All of our de novo assemblies with NGen used the default quality end trimming, and we only retained
         contigs with substantial coverage (≥200 reads).
      
      We used blastx searches as implemented in mpiblast version 1.6.0 (http://www.mpiblast.org/ webcite) for identification and annotation of our contigs. Contig sequences were searched
         against the NCBI nonredundant protein database (nr) with an E-value cutoff of 10 −4, and only the best 10 matches were retained. For toxin identification, hit descriptions
         were searched for a set of keywords based on known snake-venom toxins and protein
         classes; any sequence matching these keywords was checked for a full-length putative-toxin
         encoding sequence. The remaining contigs were screened for those whose match lengths
         were ≥90% of the length of at least one of their database matches. This step was intended
         to eliminate fragmented or partial sequences before attempting annotation. Each annotated
         sequence was checked and confirmed by hand in the SeqBuilder module of the DNAStar
         Lasergene software suite.
      
      We estimated transcript abundances using high-stringency reference-based assemblies
         in NGen3.1 with a minimum match percentage of 95. Ten million of the merged reads
         were mapped onto the full-length, annotated transcripts, and the percentage of reads
         mapping to each transcript was used as a proxy for abundance. To compare nontoxin
         expression levels across species, we aligned each species’ reads against both their
         own and the other species’ annotated nontoxin transcripts using reference-based assembly
         in NGen3.1 with a minimum match percentage of 95. For each species, we used 10 million
         reads, after first filtering reads mapping to toxin contigs.
      
      Analysis of molecular-evolutionary patterns
      Relationships among toxins within toxin families were determined by means of maximum-likelihood
         phylogeny estimation with PAUP*, version 4.0b10 [103] and the iterative search strategy described by Rokyta et al. [104]. All alignments were constructed with ClustalW [105]. Evolutionary models were selected using MrModelTest version 2 with Akaike Information
         Criterion values. Nodal support was estimated by means of posterior clade probabilities
         using MrBayes version 3.1.2 [106]. Markov chain Monte Carlo searches were run for 10 million generations with four
         chains, the temperature parameter set to 0.2, and samples taken every 1,000 generations.
         Samples from the first one million generations were discarded as burn-in. To infer
         duplication and loss events on the estimated phylogenies by reconciling them with
         the known three-species phylogenies, we used Notung 2.6 [107,108].
      
      To compare molecular-evolutionary patterns of toxins to nontoxins, we identified orthologous
         pairs of sequences from our two species by means of a reciprocal-blast analysis. We
         constructed nucleotide and amino-acid sequence databases for each species, excluding
         mitochondrially encoded sequences, and blasted each sequence from each species against
         the database generated for the other species. We performed blastn and blastp searches
         for each sequence with an E-value cutoff of 10−6. For blastn searches, we used the entire sequence, including untranslated regions.
         Putatively orthologous pairs were only retained if the two constituent sequences were
         each other’s best matches for both the nucleotide-based and amino-acid-sequence-based
         analyses. The coding sequences of retained pairs were aligned using ClustalW [105]. Alignments with more than 24 gapped positions in the coding sequences were excluded
         from further consideration to avoid considering potentially incorrectly annotated
         sequences. For the remaining orthologous pairs, we estimated the pairwise synonymous
         (dS) and nonsynonymous (dN) substitution rates and the pairwise ratios of nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution
         rates (dN/dS) with codeml from PAML version 4.4 [109,110].
      
   

