Methods
   
      Plant material
      Resistant and susceptible soybean genotypes to M. javanica, PI 595099 (PI) and BRSMG 250 ‘Nobreza’, respectively, were used to assess the RKN-induced
         changes during incompatible and compatible reactions. The main resistance sources
         that compose PI 595099 pedigree are shown in Additional files 5 and 6.
      
      Additional file 5. Genealogic tree of soybean line PI 595099. The ancestors presented in the genealogy of the soybean line PI 595099 are published
         in Crop Science from 1964 to 1997.
         	Format: JPEG 
         	Size: 133KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Additional file 6. Reaction of the main soybean genotypes used as source of resistance to Meloidogyne javanica, M. incognita and M. arenaria in PI 595099 pedigree. 1 Resistant; 2 Moderately resistant; 3 Susceptible.
         	Format: TIFF 
         	Size: 104KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Nematode inoculation
      Soybean seed was sown in sterilized sand (120°C for 30&nbsp;min) and germinated in an acclimatized
         chamber under a 16-hour-photoperiod at 27 ± 2°C. After a 72&nbsp;h period the plantlets
         were transplanted to test pots containing 300&nbsp;mL of sterile substrate (2 soil: 1 sand).
         Eight days after transplanting the soybean plants were inoculated with 500&nbsp;J2 of M. javanica per plant.
      
      Histological experiments
      Five infected soybean root samples were randomly collected from each time point (1,
         2, 4, 6 and 8 DAI) and stained with industrial food colorant [69]. The presence of juveniles in the roots was registered through a stereo microscope
         (SQF-F; Tecnival, Argentina) with a 30x magnification and statistically analyzed according
         to a generalized linear model (GLM) with Poisson error as a function of time point
         and genotype. In addition, gall number, egg masses and total population were estimated
         after 45&nbsp;days of inoculation in each genotype in order to evaluate the nematode reproduction.
         The experiment was performed as a randomized complete block design with five replications
         per period. The averages between genotypes were compared in relation to gall number,
         egg masses and number of J2 and eggs (total population). Statistical analysis was carried out using the free
         R programming language (http://www.r-project.org/ webcite) with significance level of 5%, and the averages were compared using Kruskal-Wallis
         non-parametric method.
      
      Pyrosequencing
      Root sections of five independent biological replicates, from soybean resistant line
         PI 595099 inoculated and mock-inoculated with 500&nbsp;J2 of M. javanica, were collected at each time point (0, 6, 12&nbsp;h, 1, 2, 4, 6 and 8 DAI). Mock-inoculated
         roots were treated the same as inoculated roots except no J2 nematodes were added and RNA samples were taken from soybean roots of both treatments.
         Tissues of all time intervals were pooled and total RNA was extracted using Trizol
         reagent (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Ambion®, UK) according to the manufacturer’s
         instructions. The single RNA pool of both inoculated and mock-inoculated control samples
         was then subjected to large-scale pyrosequencing using a 454 GLX titanium sequencer
         employing a single run. We deposited the raw sequence data in SRA, under accession
         number SRA069880. Transcript sequences cited in the manuscript are already included
         in the public database Phytozome, Glycine max reference genome release 1.0 (http://www.phytozome.net webcite).
      
      Assembly of transcript reads
      Raw 454 sequencing reads were processed with est2assembly pipeline [16] and the assembly of transcript reads was carried out by a guided assembly approach
         using the soybean reference genome [70]. Mapping against the reference genome was done using the PASA software [17]. Additionally, for the non–aligned EST sequences a de novo transcript assembly was performed with Mira Assembler 3.4.0 using default parameters
         and the resulting clusters were used as input for a second PASA run.
      
      Gene expression analyses
      Gene expression analysis was carried out using the “gene counts” obtained by summing
         the number of sequences mapping to exons within each gene model in the Glyma 1.0 Soybean
         reference genome release at Phytozome. For genes with multiple transcripts, we took
         only one transcript to represent the gene. For the contrast of the gene counts between
         inoculated and mock-inoculated samples we applied a statistical test implemented in
         the glm edgeR software [20,71], which uses a negative binomial distribution to model the digital gene expression
         across conditions based on generalized linear models (glms) suitable for multifactor
         experiments of any complexity. Genes possibly undergoing transcriptional changes were
         selected within a raw p–value cutoff of 0.1 and imposing that the sum of the gene
         counts to each gene were greater or equal to 5.
      
      Aware that the absence of sequenced mRNA sample replicates (technical or biological)
         implies in limitations to test differential expression based on sequence data we looked
         for indications that the sequence data regarding the “gene counts” fitted very properly
         by 1) carry out a descriptive analysis of the sequence data to obtain indications
         that those gene counts were, for each sample, correlated at some acceptable level
         so that the comparisons across treatments within the only one sequencing run show
         small deviations from uniformity; 2) admit a reasonable estimation of global biological
         variation (BCV) across all genes, then insert these estimation as the dispersion (BCV^2)
         into the edgeR data object containing the experiment design matrix; 3) proceed to
         statistical model fitting, and 4) isolate a large subset of genes based on raw p-values
         to perform a ranked analysis of fold changes in association with gene ontology (GO)
         terms.
      
      Functional annotation
      Comparative analyses for functional annotation were carried out using the soybean
         gene coordinates taken from Phytozome v7.0. When necessary, manual annotation of selected
         genes was performed by transferring best similarity search results using the program
         BLAST [72] against Arabidopsis proteins obtained from The Arabidopsis Information Resource blast
         datasets (TAIR 10). For selected gene families specialized databases, like Pfam [73] and PeroxiBase [44], were used to improve annotation.
      
      Mapping between Phytozome’s gene model identifiers and GO terms was performed using
         Glycine max GO annotation file downloaded from agriGO download center [74] and Biomart resource at Phytozome. FUNC package [21] was used for detecting significant associations between PI 595099 gene sets and GO
         annotations. Additional redundancy removal and visualization of significant associations
         was performed using the web tool REViGO [22].
      
      In order to capture prominent functional patterns we also categorized the set of differentially
         expressed genes based on the presence of domains annotated according to Pfam classification
         [73] using the InterproScan software. Pfam signatures were mapped to GO terms to detect
         cases of strict functional implications of sets of predicted domains using the Pfam2GO
         mapping of external classification systems to GO provided by the Gene Ontology Consortium
         [75]. When the mapping was not obtained thorugh these means, we used data about recorded
         unintegrated domains as provided by SuperFamily [76] or Panther [77] databases to infer the GO annotation.
      
      Internet resources
      Phytozome, http://www.phytozome.net webcite (May 23, 2011)
      
      Cytochrome P450 database, http://drnelson.uthsc.edu/CytochromeP450.html webcite (May 23, 2011)
      
      PeroxiBase, http://peroxibase.toulouse.inra.fr webcite (May 23, 2011)
      
      PredGPI, http://gpcr2.biocomp.unibo.it/gpipe webcite (May 23, 2011)
      
      SignalP, http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP webcite (May 23, 2011)
      
      agriGO, http://bioinfo.cau.edu.cn/agriGO webcite (May 23, 2011)
      
      REViGO, http://revigo.irb.hr webcite (May 23, 2011)
      
      Soybase, http://www.soybase.org webcite (Oct 31, 2012)
      
   

