Methods
   
      This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the School of Veterinary Medicine
         and Animal Science –UNESP Botucatu (n° 175/2011-CEUA). Permission to use the cats
         in the study was obtained from the owners.
      
      Thirty clinically healthy cats recruited from client-owned or shelter-owned were used.
         The cats were judged to be healthy from complete physical, and orthopaedic examinations
         based on described by Voss and Steffen [6]. Although the cats did not have any signs of orthopaedic disease, digital radiographs
         only of the hip joints and stifle joints were obtained to complement clinical examination.
         One experienced radiologist reviewed the radiographs. Before the data collection,
         the cats were acclimatised to the room and stimulated to walk across the walkway for
         1&nbsp;hour or more. Each cat was weighed on the same electronic scale immediately before
         data collection.
      
      Data collection
      The kinetic and temporospatial parameters of gait were measured with a 1951&nbsp;mm × 447&nbsp;mm
         pressure-sensitive walkway (Walkway High Resolution HRV4; Tekscan, South Boston, Massachusetts,
         USA) containing 33,408 pressure-sensitive cells. The sensors of the pressure-sensing
         walkway were equilibrated and calibrated using a phantom as reported previously [26] and according to the manufacturer’s specifications. During each trial, the cats were
         stimulated to walk in a straight line over the pressure-sensitive walkway; toys, food,
         and occasionally the presence of the owner were necessary to accomplish this task.
         In general, the stimulus was done with the materials positioned at the opposite end
         of the walkway. Boards measuring 2 X 0.8&nbsp;m were placed on both sides of the walkway
         when deemed necessary.
      
      For each animal, an average of 20 trials was obtained. The data from the first five
         valid trials were selected for each cat and analysed using designated software (Walkway
         7.0; Tekscan, Boston, USA). A trial was considered valid if the cat walked at velocity
         within a previously determined range (0.54-0.74&nbsp;m/s) and acceleration (-0.20 to 0.20&nbsp;m/s2) parameters and if the 4 limbs had contacted with the surface of the walkway during
         each walk cycle.
      
      For each limb, the gait cycle time (s), stance time (s) swing time (s) and stride
         length (m) were the determined temporospatial parameters. The stance time percentage
         was calculated as follows: (stance time/gait cycle time) × 100. The swing time percentage
         was calculated as follows: (swing time/gait cycle time) × 100. The stride corresponded
         to the distance between two consecutive ground contacts of the same limb.
      
      The PVF and the VI were the kinetic parameters determined. The PVF and VI were normalised
         to the cat’s body weight and represented as a percentage of body weight, %BW and %BW*t,
         respectively. The percentage of body distribution among the four limbs was calculated
         as follows: (PVF of the limb/total PVF of the 4 limbs) × 100.
      
      The duty factor in the hind limbs was calculated by dividing stance time by gait cycle
         time.
      
      Limb lengths
      With the animal standing, the lengths of each forelimb and each hind limb were measured
         (cm), respectively, by the distance from the ground to the dorsal scapular rim and
         from the ground to the iliac crest using a generic plastic tape (metric).
      
      Symmetry ratio and maximum percentage of asymmetry
      Since the side of asymmetry can vary, the symmetry ratio was calculated by dividing
         the highest value by the lowest value of each variable [30]. A mean (SD) of the 5 measurements of every animal was used. The maximum percentage
         of asymmetry was calculated by the formula: (Symmetry index – 1) × 100.
      
      Statistical method
      To compare the temporospatial parameters and the kinetic data was used general linear
         model with sides (left and right) and sex (male and female) as fixed factors. An independent
         sample T-test was used to compare lengths of the forelimbs and hind limbs between
         groups. The values were expressed as the means ± standard deviation, and the coefficients of variation (CV) were calculated with the comparison data between
         the groups. Differences were considered significant at P &lt; 0.05.
      
      The symmetry index was expressed as mean ± standard deviation. The maximum percentage
         of asymmetry was determined by the upper percentage of the confidence interval calculated
         at 95% including all cats.
      
      Pearson’s correlation coefficients (r) were used to evaluate the linear relationships
         between the limb lengths and the temporospatial parameters and kinetic parameters.
         The correlations were deemed significant at the 5% probability level.
      
   

