Methods
   
      Patients and pretreatment criteria
      After institutional review board (IRB) approval, retrospective data of sixty- eight
         consecutive patients with histologically proven, non-metastatic NPC treated at our
         department from April 2006 to December 2011 was collected. Pretreatment evaluation
         consisted of complete history and physical examination, rigid nasendoscopy, magnetic
         resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT) imaging of head and neck, CT chest,
         complete blood count, liver function tests, renal profile, dental and audiological
         assessment prior to the treatment. After May 2008, all the patients were tested for
         Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) on histological specimens. Positron emission tomography (PET)
         imaging, CT abdomen and bone scan were optional and were performed when clinically
         indicated. Patients who had evidence of distant metastasis were not eligible for this
         treatment protocol. All patients were treated after taking informed consent. AJCC
         2002 cancer staging classification was used to stage tumors.
      
      Radiation therapy techniques
      CT simulation was done for all patients in supine position with thermoplastic masks
         (S-frame) for immobilization. Images were acquired with and without contrast using
         3mm slices for planning purpose. Pre-chemotherapy MRI and CT imaging were fused with
         CT simulation data using co-registration software where deemed appropriate to delineate
         the tumor. The gross tumor volume (GTV) included all primary and nodal disease seen
         on MRI and/or CT scan. CTV denoted the subclinical regions at risk for involvement.
         The high-risk clinical tumor volume (CTV-1) included GTV plus 5–10 mm margin. CTV-2
         as designed for potentially involved regions included the nasopharyngeal cavity (limited
         only to the posterior part of nasal cavity), maxillary sinus (limited to 5-mm anterior
         to the posterior nasal aperture and maxillary mucosa), pterygopalatine fossa, posterior
         ethmoid sinus, parapharyngeal space, skull base, anterior third of clivus and cervical
         vertebra, inferior sphenoid sinus and cavernous sinus, and included the retropharyngeal
         lymph nodal regions from the base of skull to cranial edge of the second cervical
         vertebra. The CTV of the neck nodal regions included level II, III, IV, V, which was
         outlined according to the recommendation by the RTOG/EORTC CTV delineation protocol
         for head and neck malignancies. The planning target volume (PTV) was created based
         on each volume with an additional 3-mm margin, allowing for setup variability. Critical
         normal structures including the brainstem, spinal cord, parotid glands, optic nerves,
         chiasm, lens, eyeballs, larynx, esophagus, temporomandibular joints, mandible and
         cochlea were contoured and set as organs at risk (OARs) during optimization. RT was
         delivered by using a simultaneous-integrated IMRT boost technique. The radiation dose
         delivered was 66-70 Gy in 33–35 fractions (2 Gy per day) to gross tumor (prechemotherapy
         volume), 63 Gy in 35 fractions (1.8 Gy per day) to high risk volume and 50.4 Gy in
         28 fractions (1.8 Gy per day) to low risk volume (Figure&nbsp;1).
      
      Figure 1. High, intermediate and low dose areas in IMRT – SMART plan for nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
      Chemotherapy
      Fifty six patients (82.4%) with bulky tumors (T4 or N+) received neoadjuvant chemotherapy
         2–4 cycles. Regimen used were as; (a) Cisplatin and Docetaxel in 30 patients, (b)
         Cisplatin and Epirubicin in 16 patients and (c) Cisplatin and 5-Flourouracil in 10
         patients. Sixty four patients (91.2%) received concurrent chemoradiation. Chemotherapy
         used was either weekly Cisplatin 40 mg/m2 (40 patients) or 3 weekly Cisplatin 100 mg/m2 (24 patients).
      
      Follow-up
      All patients were evaluated weekly during radiation therapy. First follow up was at
         6 weeks after the completion of their treatment, then every 2–3 months in the first
         2 years, every 6 months from year 2 through year 5, and annually thereafter. Each
         follow-up included a complete history, physical examination and rigid nasendoscopy.
         CT scan of the head and neck was performed at 2–3 months post treatment and afterwards
         as needed. Acute toxicity profile during treatment and first three months was assessed
         by Common Toxicity Criteria CTC version 3.0 and late toxicities were scored according
         to the RTOG radiation morbidity scoring criteria at each follow-up.
      
      Statistical analyses
      The actuarial local/regional control, response rates and disease-free survival were
         calculated by life test method. The duration of time to locoregional failure and distant
         metastasis was measured from the date of the completion of radiation therapy until
         documented treatment failure. The duration of DFS was calculated from diagnosis until
         development of documented pathologic or radiologic recurrence. Log-rank test and chi-square
         were used to detect the significant difference in survivals between different prognostic
         groups. Multivariate analysis using the Cox proportional hazard model was performed
         for the aforementioned endpoints to define independent predictors among various potential
         prognostic factors.
      
   

