Methods
   
      Setting
      We undertook a study comparing the proportion of men who were tested for HIV and STIs
         before and after a sexual health practice nurse was introduced into a clinic (Clinic
         A) with the aim of increasing HIV and STI testing. A comparison clinic (Clinic B),
         a general practice also specializing in gay men’s health, but with no sexual health
         nurse, was used as a control clinic. At Clinic A, clients were able to access the
         sexual health nurse for testing either by appointment, or directly following a consultation
         with their general practitioner if they recommended testing. Clinic A operated utilizing
         the Australian government universal insurance scheme, Medicare, with no direct costs
         to clients. Although Clinic B also used Medicare, clients had to pay some additional
         consultation fees. In addition, the sexual health nurse provided HIV chronic disease
         care, whereby HIV positive MSM could visit the nurse every three months for a range
         of services, including, but not limited to, the collection of routine HIV serologic
         monitoring tests and STI testing. At Clinic B, all HIV and STI testing was carried
         out by general practitioners only. At each clinic the routine practice was for patients
         to self-collect anal and urine samples.
      
      Study design
      We compared the proportion of men who were tested at each clinic in the 24&nbsp;months
         prior to the intervention (Period 1: 1st October 2006 to 30th September 2007; and Period 2: 1st October 2007 to 30th September 2008) and the 12&nbsp;months after (Period 3: 1st October 2008 to 30th September 2009) the sexual health nurse was introduced. The two periods prior to
         the intervention, Periods 1 and 2 were included to establish whether there was a background
         increase in testing prior to the introduction of the nurse.
      
      Data extraction
      The total number of MSM attending each clinic was retrieved from each clinics electronic
         patient database. The number of HIV positive MSM attending each clinic was obtained
         by counting the number of men who had at least one HIV viral load assay in each period.
         Men who had an HIV viral load test performed at any visit over the three periods were
         included as HIV positive. However, if an individual had a negative HIV antibody test
         at an earlier visit before they had HIV viral load tests, they were deemed to be HIV
         negative for any prior visits.
      
      HIV viral load tests and the number of HIV and STI tests undertaken during these periods
         and at both clinics was obtained from the Victorian Primary Care Network for Sentinel
         Surveillance of STIs and Blood Borne Viruses [16]. The tests included serology for HIV antibodies and syphilis enzyme-linked immunoassay
         (EIA), a urine specimen for chlamydia; and a rectal swab for chlamydia and gonorrhoea.
         The Victorian Primary Care Network for Sentinel Surveillance of STIs and Blood Borne
         Viruses [16] does not routinely collect data for pharyngeal gonorrhoea testing; therefore it was
         not included in the analysis. An episode of complete testing was defined as the collection
         of serology for HIV antibodies (for HIV negative MSM); syphilis EIA; a urine test;
         and an anal swab on the same date.
      
      Analysis
      MSM were stratified by HIV status and analyzed separately using SPSS v.18. The proportion
         of men who were tested for each STI or for an episode of complete testing was calculated
         for each clinic and time periods. If an individual attended and was tested more than
         once in the same period he was only counted once. Chi-squared (χ2) was used to test for differences in proportions of men who had each test or a complete
         episode of testing. If a man presented in multiple periods the visits were considered
         to be independent observations and so were included once for every period they attended
         in. The Alfred Hospital Research Ethics Committee granted approval for this study.
      
   

