Methods
   
      Design
      To determine the efficacy of a specially developed strategy for implementation of
         the guidelines for depression [4], we conducted a randomised controlled trial (RCT) in which we compared an intervention
         group with a control group. In this RCT we compared the intervention of a specially
         developed training programme with the usual methods of implementation and training
         currently in use by the social security agency.
      
      The intervention was a training programme designed for IPs, in which they learnt to
         apply the guidelines for depression [3]. This programme, together with baseline and follow-up measurements, was integrated
         into a four-day postgraduate course located at the Netherlands School of Public and
         Occupational Health (NSPOH).
      
      While the intervention group was trained in applying the guidelines for depression,
         the control group received an alternative programme of training in motivational interviewing
         that did not conflict with the intervention programme. The RCT took three days within
         a period of two weeks in March 2009. After the RCT ended, the control group received
         the same training as the intervention group, while the intervention group received
         the alternative programme. This was planned as the fourth day of the course, which
         was held three months later at the end of June 2009.
      
      By using actors simulating four different case reports on video, we managed to create
         a laboratory setting in which we could measure the work disability assessments of
         clients with depression by each IP. In these videos the role of the client was played
         by four different actors, while the role of the IP was played by two ‘real’ IPs, independently
         selected for this purpose. The training programme was designed to be also applied
         in practice. The Ethics Committee of the VU University Medical Centre granted approval
         for the study design and the RCT was accepted by the Netherlands Trial Register under
         number NTR1863.
      
      Participants
      In January 2009, IPs employed by the Institute were invited to take part in a postgraduate
         course in applying the guidelines for depression, given in the period from March to
         July 2009. The inclusion criteria were that individuals should be registered as insurance
         physicians, or still in training as such, and should be conducting disability assessments
         of clients as commissioned by the Institute. The NSPOH was responsible for enrolment
         of participants, who also provided written informed consent to take part in the study.
         43 insurance physicians participated in the study.
      
      The participants were allocated in order of registration to either the intervention
         group or the control group by using a random-sequence table. Participants who were
         not available on the planned dates were excluded from the trial. The participants
         were informed about the fact that the course was part of a research project, but they
         were not informed about the design of the entire project, i.e. the various measurements
         and the type of group they participated in.
      
      Data collection
      Data were collected at the NSPOH during the period of the training course. At baseline
         (pre-intervention) and at follow-up (post-intervention) each IP assessed the work
         limitations of two clients, played by actors, who were presented separately on video.
         The actors played clients with depression, reconstructed from real case reports. The
         actors played their roles on the basis of extensive scripts, with room for improvisation.
         The videos showed the disability assessment encounter between a client (actor) and
         an independent IP (not a participant in the RCT), who had been briefed to perform
         the assessment in complete accordance with the guidelines for depression. The decision
         phase of the assessment encounter was not shown on the video. The participating IPs
         completed their medical disability reports, including the LFA, immediately after watching
         each client on the video. All reports and completed LFAs were collected directly afterwards.
         The researchers were blinded for the collection of data and an independent research
         assistant coded the data.
      
      Outcomes
      The primary outcome of the RCT was guideline adherence, measured using performance
         indicators. A detailed description of the development and reliability of these performance
         indicators has been published elsewhere [11], as has the effect of the intervention on guideline adherence [4].
      
      Secondary outcome in the RCT was LFA scores. These LFA scores were scored by the IP
         participating in the RCT for the work limitations of the clients presented in the
         four videos. The LFA consists of six sections containing a total of 106 items: I personal
         functioning (30 items), II social functioning (17 items), III adjusting to the physical
         environment (13 items), IV dynamic movements (31 items), V static posture (11 items),
         and VI working hours (4 items). A large-scale study (of 51,000 disability assessments)
         into the dimensions behind these items [12] discovered 16 dimensions, each forming an scale. The internal reliability of the
         scales (Cronbach’s alpha) was generally acceptable (alpha 0.60-0.75) to good (alpha
         &gt;0.75) or even very good (alpha &gt;0.85). Only one dimension – communication – had an
         unacceptable level of internal reliability (alpha 0.53). In a follow-up study using
         a second order factor analysis [13], 14 of these 16 scales (excluding communication and working hours) were further reduced
         to four scales:
      
      1) Mental abilities: limitations in coping with various mental task demands
      2) General physical abilities: limitations covering various aspects of the musculoskeletal
         system
      
      3) Autonomy: limitations in being able to act autonomously in the working situation
      4) Manual skills and grip strength limitations.
      Since the internal reliability of this last scale was very low (alpha 0.46), items
         on this scale were included in the scale for general physical ability, a possibility
         demonstrated by another study of LFA data from 84,000 disability assessments [10]. The three scales in the mentioned study had an acceptable level of reliability (alphas
         were 0.69 for scale 1, 0.72 for scale 2, and 0.75 for scale 3 including manual skills
         and grip strength). Hence, in the current study we used these three scales, with an
         additional separate scale for working hours, that had a very good internal reliability
         (alpha 0.97) [12].
      
      Analyses
      To address the first hypothesis, we used an unpaired t-test to analyse differences
         in the mean sum scores of the four scales between the intervention group and the control
         group for each case report (four case reports: the first two pre-intervention, the
         other two post-intervention). To examine whether correction was necessary for the
         influence of any unequal distribution of background variables between the intervention
         group and the control group, we performed regression analysis using the relevant background
         variable as covariate.
      
      To address the second hypothesis regarding inter-rater reliability, we performed analyses
         using linear mixed models, which enable modelling of variances (and covariances) and
         provide the possibility of accounting for hierarchical data [14]. We used the variances to calculate the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC,
         with values ranging between 0 and 1) [15]. A higher ICC is an indication of greater degree of inter-rater reliability. We also
         calculated whether the difference between the ICCs of the intervention group and the
         control group was significantly different from zero. For a more detailed description
         of the statistical analysis please we refer to the Additional file 1. All analyses were performed using SPSS 15.0 [14].
      
      Additional file 1. Statistical method for calculating intraclass correlation coefficients.
         	Format: DOC 
         	Size: 28KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Word Viewer
   

