Methods
   
      Mice
      Specific-pathogen-free, 3 to 5 week old C3H/HeN (C3H) and severe combined immunodeficient
         (SCID) C3H/Smn.CIcrHsd-Prkdcscid (C3H-scid) mice were obtained from Frederick Cancer Research Center (Frederick, MD) and Harlan
         Sprague Dawley, Inc. (Indianapolis, IN), respectively. Pregnant Swiss outbred Crl:CD1(ICR)
         mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (Hollister, CA). Mice were infected
         by subdermal inoculation of mid-log phase B. burgdorferi in 0.1 ml culture medium on the dorsal thoracic midline. Mice were killed by carbon
         dioxide narcosis and exsanguination by cardiocentesis. Infection status of mice was
         confirmed at necropsy by culture of the urinary bladder and sub-inoculation site,
         as described [4]. Animal use was approved by the University of California Davis Animal Care and Use
         Committee. University of California Davis has a Public Health Service Animal Welfare
         Assurance on file and is fully accredited by the Association for the Assessment and
         Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International.
      
      Histopathology
      Joint (knee and tibiotarsus) and heart tissues were fixed in neutral buffered formalin,
         demineralized, paraffin-embedded, sectioned, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
         Tissues were blindly evaluated and tibiotarsal arthritis severity was scored on a
         scale of 0 (negative), 1 (mild), 2 (moderate) or 3 (severe). Based upon extensive
         use of this scoring system, a score of 3 is generally limited to SCID mice, and a
         score of 1–2 is typical of immunocompetent C3H mice [4,34,35]. The prevalence of carditis was also blindly recorded, but a severity score is not
         possible with carditis, due to variation in severity among mice within a particular
         treatment group, thereby precluding accurate scoring [34].
      
      Bacterial strains
      Low passage infectious B. burgdorferi s.s. strain B31-A3 (wild-type) was acquired from D. Scott Samuels, University of
         Montana, and utilized as both a wild-type control and for genetic manipulation. B31-A3
         is a clonal isolate of B31 MI, the prototype B31 strain utilized for genome sequencing
         [36,37]. An additional B31-A3 variant, B. burgdorferi B31-A3-lp28-1-G, containing a gentamicin resistance gene on lp28-1 [38], was provided by D. Scott Samuels (originally from P. Rosa, Rocky Mountain Laboratories).
         Spirochetes were grown in modified Barbour Stoenner Kelly (BSKII) medium [39] with 6% rabbit serum. Inocula were enumerated by dark-field microscopy using a Petroff-Hausser
         chamber immediately prior to use, and serial 10-fold dilutions were prepared for evaluating
         median infectious doses. For isolation of transformants, spirochetes were cultured
         on semi-solid gelatin-free BSKII medium supplemented with 1.7% dissolved agarose plus
         appropriate antibiotic (50 μg/ml streptomycin or 40 μg/ml gentamicin). Escherichia coli cloning strain TOP10F’ (Invitrogen, Inc., CA), was grown in Luria-Bertani broth under
         aerobic conditions at 37°C. Transformed E. coli were selectively cultured in broth medium with 50 μg/ml spectinomycin.
      
      Genetic modification of B. burgdorferi
      Arp null mutants (Δarp) were constructed by exchange of the arp open reading frame (ORF) with a mutagenic cassette via homologous recombination.
         The mutagenic cassette consisted of a streptomycin-spectinomycin resistance cassette,
         flaB-aadA (kindly provided by D. Scott Samuels, University of Montana, Missoula, MT), flanked
         by regions of the B. burgdorferi B31-A3 plasmid lp28-1 that flanked the arp gene at both the 5′ and 3′ regions. Single Overlap Extension PCR (SOEing) was used
         to join each part of the mutagenic cassette through primers containing overlapping
         homology (Table&nbsp;4). First, the 5′ flanking region (258bp) was amplified using primers ARP01 and the
         SOEing primer ARP02, which included homology to the 5′ region of the flaB-aadA PCR product. The flaB-aadA product (1199bp) was amplified using primers ARP03 and the SOEing primer ARP04, which
         included homology to the 5′ region of the 3′ region PCR product. The 3′ flanking region
         (1309bp) was amplified using primers ARP05 and ARP06. Each part was gel purified using
         the Qiagen Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA). SOEing was performed using
         a 2μl aliquot of each part mixed with 0.5 μl (10 μM) each of primers ARP01 and ARP06
         to produce a fragment that was 2766bp in length. The resulting mutagenic cassette
         was cloned into the 3.9kb commercial vector, pCR2.1 TOPO (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad,
         CA) to produce a 7.5 kb suicide vector, “pKH-1”. Plasmid DNA of pKH-1 (5–10 μg) was
         electroporated into wild-type B. burgdorferi using the previously described protocol [40]. Transformants were selected by plating onto semi-solid BSKII medium (gelatin-free
         BSKII medium supplemented with 1.7% dissolved agarose and 50 μg/ml streptomycin).
         Clones that survived antibiotic selection were analyzed by PCR to confirm allele exchange
         using a combination of primers exterior and interior of the integration site (Table&nbsp;4). PCR was performed to confirm the absence of the arp gene in several potential mutants. Plasmid profiling of Δarp mutants was performed
         by PCR as previously described [28] to select mutants that contained important plasmids, including cp9 (rev), cp26 (ospC), cp32-1 (BBP33), cp32-2/7 (BBO32), cp32-3 (ospG), cp32-6 (BBM32), cp32-8 (BBL32-34), cp32-9 (BBN32-33), lp17 (BBD12-13), lp21 (BBU06-07),
         lp25 (pncA), lp28-1 (vlsE), lp28-3 (BBH17), lp28-4 (non-coding region), lp36 (BBK12), lp38 (ospD), lp54 (ospA), and lp56 (BBQ67), using previously published primers [28,41]. One of the Δarp clones (Δarp3) that retained the same complete set of plasmids as
         the wild-type isolate was used in further experiments.
      
      Table 4. Primers for construction of the arp mutagenic cassette and verification of allelic exchange
      The Δarp3 clone was complemented with a whole lp28-1 plasmid that contained the arp gene and a selection marker for gentamicin (lp28-1-G). This plasmid was knocked in
         to replace the endogenous lp28-1 (where arp was deleted), as previously published [38]. Plasmid DNA containing lp28-1-G was purified from B. burgdorferi B31-A3-lp28-1-G, electroporated into B31-Δarp3 spirochetes, and then complemented
         transformants were selected with gentamicin. A series of PCRs using diagnostic primers
         (Table&nbsp;1) were used to identify clones that had undergone successful plasmid exchange of lp28-1
         arp::aadA with lp28-1G by confirming the presence of the arp operon. Plasmid profiling was performed and the complemented isolate B31-Δarp3-2.2
         (Δarp3-lp28-1-G) was used for further analysis.
      
      Quantitative PCR
      DNA was extracted from sub-inoculation site, heart base, ventricular muscle, quadriceps
         muscle and right tibiotarsus (integument removed), and samples were subjected to real-time
         Q-PCR. In addition to the site of inoculation, four additional sites were evaluated,
         based upon previous studies demonstrating that they all become consistently infected
         [22], but manifest different patterns of inflammation. Heart base is the site where carditis
         occurs, whereas cardiac ventricular muscle develops minimal or no inflammation [34]. In addition, the tibiotarsal joint typically develops arthritis, whereas the adjacent
         quadriceps femoris muscle develops minimal or no inflammation [42]. Quantification of gene copies was based upon copy number per mg of tissue weight,
         as previously described [22]. DNA was extracted from samples using the DNeasy tissue kit, according to the manufacturer’s
         instructions for tissues or insects (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA). In addition, DNA from
         B. burgdorferi cultured from mouse tissues was extracted for verification of genetic status of isolates.
         Three oligonucleotides, two primers and a probe, for the B. burgdorferi flaB and the arp genes were used, as previously described [19].
      
      Serology
      Immune sera were generated in C3H mice inoculated with 105 wild-type, Δarp3, or Δarp3 + lp28-1G spirochetes at 60 days of infection. Infection
         was verified by culture, and individual sera were tested by enzyme linked immunosorbent
         assay (ELISA) to verify the appropriate presence or absence of Arp-reactive antibody.
         Three-fold dilutions (starting at 1:300) of immune sera were titrated by ELISA for
         antibody to B. burgdorferi B31 lysates and recombinant Arp, as described [11]. Samples were tested in duplicate, and each assay included uninfected mouse serum
         as a negative control and wild-type infected mouse serum as a positive control.
      
      Tick acquisition and transmission
      Ixodes scapularis ticks were acquired from Durland Fish, Yale University, as a single cohort of larvae
         from a pathogen-free laboratory-reared colony. In order to determine the ability of
         ticks to acquire infection, 40 larval ticks were placed on each mouse infected with
         either wild-type or Δarp3 spirochetes. Replete (fed) ticks were collected as cohorts
         from each mouse and allowed to harden and molt into nymphal ticks. Randomly selected
         ticks from each mouse/tick cohort were tested for flaB and arp by Q-PCR. Remaining nymphal ticks in each cohort were placed on naïve C3H mice to
         assess the relative ability of infected nymphal ticks to transmit wild-type or Δarp3
         spirochetes.
      
      Statistical analysis
      Multiple comparison analyses were performed using independent samples t-test or one-way analysis of variance, followed by post-hoc pair-wise comparisons
         (Tukey’s HSD test) (PASW Statistics v. 18.0). Calculated P values ≤ 0.05 were considered significant. The median infectious dose (ID50) was calculated using the method of Reed and Muench [43].
      
   

