Methods
   
      A self-assessment questionnaire was used as a survey instrument for this study. Khami
         et al’s methodology was adopted for this study [15]. The questionnaire used in the study conducted by Khami et al. [15], was pilot tested amongst five dental students who finished dental school within
         two months of piloting the questionnaire. Specific details on the questionnaire were
         adjusted based on outcomes of the discussions held with the students. Revision of
         the questionnaire was based on ease of understanding and interpretation of contents
         of the questionnaire during the pilot study. The questionnaire was also adjusted in
         view of the study objectives and the context of the practice of dentistry in Nigeria.
         For example, the Iranian questionnaire explore for the role of past training as a
         dental hygienist in preventive practice. This questionnaire did not include those
         set of questions that explored for the role of past training as a dental hygienists
         in preventive practice since there is no such history of dental hygienist becoming
         trained as dentist in the dental education history of Nigeria. Secondly, the questions
         about basic qualifications were revised to reflect the types of possible qualifications
         that could be obtained in Nigeria. Thirdly, the questionnaire asked about working
         experience. Since the questionnniare was administered to students, this question was
         excluded.
      
      Estimated sample size for assessment of preventive oral health behaviour of dental
         students using a prevalence of 47% reported by Khami et al [15], 95% confidence interval and an error margin of 5% was 382.
      
      The target population of this study comprised of the final year dental students in
         six of the eight dental schools in Nigeria. Two schools do not have students in their
         final year and thus, were excluded from the study. All the final year dental students
         in the six dental schools were eligible to participate in the study. The co-investigators
         for this study administered the questionnaire prior to the commencement of a regular
         scheduled period of classroom instruction. All the students who were present in class
         were requested to fill the form after the objective and voluntary nature of the study
         had been explained. For students who were willing to participate in the study, their
         filled questionnaire was submitted to their respective class captains at the end of
         the classes. The class captains then returned the filled questionnaires to any of
         the co-investigators in their respective schools. All questionnaires were retrieved
         within a week of their administration.
      
   

