Methods
   
      Study design
      In a pragmatic cluster randomised controlled trial key workers and their patients
         are randomly allocated to the experimental condition using DIALOG+ or the control
         condition with regular ratings of satisfaction using the DIALOG Scale on a tablet.
         Both conditions are in addition to treatment as usual. There are four data collection
         points: baseline, and 3, 6 and 12 month follow-ups.
      
      Key workers are recruited from Community Mental Health Teams in East London (East
         London NHS Foundation Trust). We aim to recruit a maximum of seven patients per key
         worker. If necessary, the patients to approach for participation are randomly selected
         from the pool of eligible patients on a key worker’s caseload. However, this is rare,
         and usually we recruit fewer than seven patients per key worker. Once all consenting
         patients (per key worker) meeting the inclusion criteria have been recruited, the
         key worker – and their patients – are randomly allocated to either the intervention
         or control condition. Clustering of clinicians prevents contamination effects in the
         study. Randomisation is carried out via e-mail by an independent statistician at the
         Pragmatic Clinical Trials Unit of Queen Mary, University of London. The unit of randomisation
         is the key worker using randomly permuted blocks with variable block sizes and equal
         allocation ratio.
      
      Key workers use the intervention with their patients for a period of six months. Midway
         through receiving the intervention (3 months), at the end of the intervention period
         (6 months), and after a 6 month follow-up period patients are interviewed by researchers
         and outcomes assessed. These assessments are conducted on NHS sites or in the community.
      
      Researchers assessing the outcomes are blinded to the allocation of the patients.
         If blinding cannot be maintained, we put researchers working at the Unit for Social
         and Community Psychiatry at Queen Mary, University of London (who are independent
         of the core research team) into contact with patients via telephone for conducting
         the assessment of the primary outcome and, as far as feasible, secondary outcomes.
         In such cases, patients are asked not to discuss the treatment they received for the
         duration of the call.
      
      Planned interventions
      Key workers and their patients in the experimental condition are instructed to use
         DIALOG+ at least once per month over a six month period, although this may vary due
         to the practical organisation of care. DIALOG+ is used as defined in the accompanying
         manual, and the DIALOG 2.0 software runs on a tablet. All key workers in the experimental
         group are trained in one session before beginning the intervention. The training is
         provided by two experienced clinicians who are independent of the research study team
         (both qualified in psychological treatments), with the number of training sessions
         divided between the two. For practical reasons, the majority of training is carried
         out one to one. During the training session, key workers are provided with reading
         material and the DIALOG+ manual, have the procedure demonstrated to them, participate
         in a role-play exercise, and have the opportunity to watch videos. For each key worker,
         the first DIALOG+ session with a patient is audio-recorded and feedback is provided
         by their trainer via a follow-up session. A subsequent DIALOG+ session is also audio-recorded
         to provide further feedback. Throughout the duration of the study key workers can
         contact the trainers for further sessions for support and advice at any time.
      
      Key workers and patients in the experimental group may decide to continue with DIALOG+
         after the end of the six month intervention. This will be documented and considered
         in the analysis of outcomes after the follow-up period.
      
      The control condition includes treatment as usual plus a defined intervention that
         also involves the use of a tablet and an assessment of the patient’s satisfaction.
         The patients use the device to rate their satisfaction on the 11 domains of the DIALOG
         scale. The intervention is delivered with the same frequency as DIALOG+, with such
         assessments being undertaken after a routine meeting. The key workers are instructed
         to demonstrate the software to the patients prior to their first time completing the
         scale. Patients need to complete the scale alone without the key worker’s help, and
         patients and key workers are not to discuss the ratings. This is intended to control
         for the effect of the implementation of an electronic device in the clinical setting
         and the regular assessment of satisfaction.
      
      Inclusion and exclusion criteria
      To reflect the pragmatic nature of the trial, there are wide inclusion criteria and
         very few exclusion criteria for both clinicians and patients. The inclusion criteria
         for patients are wider than in the original DIALOG trial to test whether patients
         with more acute disorders, who have not been in care for many years and whose treatment
         in secondary services may not continue for another year, can also be recruited and
         benefit from the intervention.
      
      Key workers
      Clinicians are key workers currently employed in the East London NHS Foundation Trust,
         working in community mental health teams and meeting the following criteria:
      
      • Professional qualification as a clinician (nurse, social worker, psychologist, occupational
         therapist, doctor);
      
      • More than 6 months experience of working in community mental health care;
      • Working as care coordinator.
      Clinicians are excluded if they have to attend a scheduled training course of more
         than two weeks’ time during the study period and will not continue their care-coordinating
         role whilst attending training.
      
      Patients
      We recruit patients in the East London NHS Foundation Trust, currently treated in
         a community mental health care team, fulfilling the following criteria:
      
      • Treatment in a community mental health care team for at least one month;
      • No planned discharge for the next six months;
      • Clinical diagnosis of schizophrenia or a related disorder (F20-29);
      • Age between 18 and 65 years;
      • A mean score of lower than 5 on the MANSA;
      • Capacity to give informed consent.
      Exclusion criteria
      
      • Insufficient command of the English language for conducting meetings in English
         and filling in the assessment instruments of outcomes;
      
      • A mean score of 5 or more on the MANSA;
      • Learning difficulties.
      Outcome measures
      Outcomes are assessed at baseline and after 3, 6, and 12 months.
      The primary outcome is subjective quality of life, measured on the Manchester Short
         Assessment of Quality of Life (MANSA) (as in the original trial testing DIALOG) 
         					[11]
      
      Secondary outcomes for the trial are:
      • Recovery as measured on the severity parts of each of the 24 items of the CHOICE
         scale 
         					[12] (satisfaction, i.e. the second part of each item, is already assessed on the MANSA)
      
      • Objective Social Outcomes (SIX) 
         					[13], also assessed using the MANSA (sections 2 and 3), at 6 and 12 months only
      
      • Social contacts in the last week in a structured interview
      • Treatment Satisfaction on the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ-8) 
         					[14]
      
      • The Therapeutic Relationship on the Scale for Assessing Therapeutic Relationships
         in community mental health care (patient and clinician versions) 
         					[15]
      
      • Needs on the Camberwell Assessment of Need Short Appraisal Schedule, patient-rated
         version 
         					[16]
      
      • Self-Efficacy on the General Self-Efficacy Scale 
         					[17]
      
      • Psychopathological Symptoms on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale 
         					[18]
      
      • Costs of care, assessed on the Client Service Receipt Inventory 
         					[19], i.e. data on the use and frequency of inpatient care, outpatient care (face to face
         meetings), and other health services which are obtained from case notes, electronic
         databases and patients themselves.
      
      • Mental well-being on the Warwick-Edinburgh Mental Well-Being Scale (WEMWBS) 
         					[20].
      
      All outcomes are assessed at baseline and after 3, 6, and 12 months.
      Qualitative assessments
      For assessing the feasibility of the intervention, adherence to the manual and its
         effects in the patient-clinician meetings, each patient-clinician pair in the intervention
         group has one of their meetings video-taped (or when unpractical audio-taped) and
         analysed. In the control group, we do the same for 20% of the sample. Adherence to
         manual in the intervention group is assessed against the manual for DIALOG+, using
         an adherence scale developed by the research team.
      
      The software records automatically what domains were explicitly discussed in DIALOG+
         and what actions were agreed. This information is synchronised to a server that un-blinded
         members of the research team have access to.
      
      At the end of the intervention, separate focus groups will be conducted and audio-taped
         with patients and clinicians in the intervention group to obtain their experiences
         and suggestions for improvements.
      
      Statistical analysis
      The primary analysis of subjective quality of life as measured on the MANSA will be
         conducted using a generalised linear model with a fixed effect for treatment and baseline
         MANSA score and a random effect for key worker to account for clustering.
      
      Secondary outcomes will be analysed using a similar approach, with adjustment for
         corresponding baseline values.
      
      Sensitivity analyses will be performed to explore the impact of missing data on our
         conclusions.
      
      All analysis will be conducted under the intention to treat principle and significance
         testing will be at the 5% level (2-sided). A full analysis plan will be developed
         and agreed prior to any analysis or unblinding of the data. Results will be presented
         to follow the recommendations given in the CONSORT statement extension for the reporting
         of cluster randomised trials.
      
      Economic evaluation
      The cost of the DIALOG and DIALOG+ interventions are expected to be low and will mainly
         comprise any extra time spent with the patient to administer the intervention. There
         will though be costs associated with (i) refining the procedure and developing DIALOG+
         (but when apportioned across all patients who might receive the intervention these
         will be minimal), and (ii) training key workers in their use. A nominal developmental
         cost per patient will be included and resources and time required for training will
         be measured and costed. Total costs will be calculated by combining the intervention
         costs with those associated with the use of other services. Cost differences will
         be analysed using bootstrap methods due to the expected skewness in the data distributions.
         Costs will be combined with the primary outcome measure in the form of a cost-effectiveness
         analysis. If costs are lower for one group than another and outomes are better then
         it will be ‘dominant’ in terms of cost-effectiveness. If costs are higher and outcomes
         are better then an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio will indicate the extra costs
         incurred to produce an extra unit-improvement in quality of life. Uncertainty around
         these estimates will be analysed using cost-effectiveness planes and cost-effectiveness
         acceptability curves 
         					[21].
      
      Qualitative analysis
      Videotapes will be analysed according to specific criteria (using a purposely developed
         adherence scale) for adherence to the manual. Audiotapes from focus groups will be
         analysed using thematic analysis.
      
      Proposed sample size
      We aim to recruit 42 key workers in total; with each key worker providing an average
         of four to five patients, providing a total of 180 patients.
      
      Assuming a practically negligible cluster effect (as in the original trial) the sample
         size will be sufficient to detect a medium effect size of 0.5 (Cohen’s D) with 80%
         power at the 5% significance level (2-sided). A slightly higher effect of 0.57 will
         be detected with 90% power.
      
      The effect size of 0.5 would require that at the end of the intervention patients
         in the experimental condition rate their satisfaction with at least 3 out of 12 life
         domains in the MANSA at least one point higher than patients in the control condition.
      
      This sample size allows for a cluster attrition rate of 6 key workers (30 patients)
         and a patient dropout rate of less than 10%.
      
      Recruiting participants and obtaining informed consent
      Clinicians working in Community Mental Health Teams in the East London boroughs of
         Hackney, Newham and Tower Hamlets are approached by the managers of East London NHS
         Foundation Trust and asked to participate in the study. Written informed consent to
         participate is obtained from individual key workers.
      
      Key workers, supported by research and administrative staff, identify patients on
         their caseloads fulfilling the inclusion criteria, and then ask suitable patients
         for consent to be approached by a researcher. If the answer is yes, a researcher arranges
         a meeting with the patient to provide an information sheet and to discuss the project
         in full. At the meeting, the researcher goes through the information sheet, explains
         the study, obtains written informed consent, and establishes all inclusion criteria.
      
      Patients are informed through their consent forms that they are free to withdraw from
         the study at any time, without giving reason and without any negative consequences.
         This will be emphasised by the researcher in all discussions explaining the study
         and prior to taking informed consent.
      
      As part of this process we obtain consent for one of the patient’s sessions with their
         key worker to be video recorded in order to assess adherence to the procedure, and
         for patients to attend an audio-recorded focus group at the end of their intervention
         period to discuss their experiences with other patients. This is optional for patients,
         and if they do not wish to be video recorded or take part in the focus group this
         will not impact on their participation in the study.
      
      Ethics approval
      The study has been approved by the London-Stanmore National Research Ethics Service
         Committee (REC reference 12/LO/1145). All data will be stored in line with the Data
         Protection Act. All audio and video recorded data will be encrypted and password protected.
      
      Trial steering committee and data monitoring and ethics committee
      Both a Trial Steering Committee and a Data Monitoring and Ethics Committee have been
         set up. No formal interim efficacy analyses have been planned.
      
   

