Methods
   
      Study identification and eligibility
      The population
      Studies of patient medication record or pharmacy order entry systems used in pharmacies
         were included while studies about other clinical information systems and clinicians
         other than pharmacists were excluded.
      
      The interventions
      The interventions included alerts, warnings, or prompts about safety of medications,
         appearing on ePMR systems during pharmacy order entry or at the point of dispensing
         in the pharmacy. Examples are drug-drug interactions, therapeutic duplications, and
         allergy alerts. Drug Utilisation Review (DUR) alerts generated for non-safety reasons
         were excluded.
      
      The outcomes
      The outcomes of interest included changes in medication error, morbidity, mortality
         and adverse drug events. Studies with outcomes not related to safety were excluded.
      
      The study types
      Studies that used comparative designs to evaluate the effectiveness of ePMR systems’
         safety features and alerts at the point of pharmacy order entry were included. For
         example, randomised controlled trials and before-after studies. Studies published
         only in abstract form were excluded.
      
      Sources of information and search strategy
      Literature searches were conducted in MEDLINE (1946 to March 2012), EMBASE (1980 to
         March 2012), Inspec (1969 to March 2012), International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970
         to March 2012), PsycINFO (1806 to March 2012) all on the OvidSP platform, and CINHAL
         (1986 to March 2012) on EBSCOHOST platform. Secondary sources such as online database
         Pharmacy Abstracts, COCHRANE database, website of the Agency for Healthcare Quality
         (AHRQ), reference lists of included studies and Internet search engines were also
         searched. Keywords for the searches included “alerts, warning, decision support, pharmacist,
         pharmacy, expert system, pharmacy information systems, PMR systems and pharmacy order
         entry”. The search terms were initially used in MEDLINE and tailored to other databases.
         Citations were retrieved into Endnote X5. Details of the search strategy used for
         the MEDLINE search are provided in the Appendix section.
      
      Study selection and data extraction
      Two reviewers (OO and VG) independently screened the title and abstracts of articles
         to identify studies, which met our inclusion criteria. The full articles for the potentially
         relevant studies were retrieved and reviewed by three reviewers (OO, MB and AA) based
         on study type, study design, participants, settings, eligible outcomes and interventions.
         A hierarchical template was used to exclude non-relevant studies. No language restrictions
         were applied to the study selection process. One investigator (OO) designed and used
         a template to extract data from the articles included in the synthesis. Two reviewers
         (MB and AA) verified the extracted data. We resolved discrepancies by discussion until
         consensus was reached.
      
      Risk of bias in included studies
      Two reviewers (OO and VG) independently assessed the quality of the included studies
         using the Cochrane Collaboration’s risk of bias tool [31]. The studies included in the synthesis were assessed individually for selection bias,
         allocation sequence concealment, blinding of participants and personnel, blinding
         of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting and other bias.
      
   

