Methods
   
      Sample collection
      Samples for geochemical and microbiological analysis were collected from 25 observation
         wells located in the east-central Illinois region of the Mahomet (Figure&nbsp;1). These wells draw groundwater from one of two sedimentary horizons, the younger,
         shallower Glasford formation or the older, deeper Banner formation. Wells were screened
         at the bottom of the respective formation over a span of 1.5&nbsp;m at depths ranging from
         41&nbsp;m to 117&nbsp;m below ground surface. These formations are comprised of unconsolidated
         sands and gravels that were deposited as glacial outwash during the Pleistocene era
         and are interbedded with confining layers of glacial till that serve as aquitards
         [23]. The bedrock underlying the north-central part of our sampling area is composed of
         pyritic coal and shale, whereas bedrock to the south and east is largely carbonate
         [17]. Locally, saline groundwater from the coal and shale passes upward and mixes with
         the dilute, meteoric groundwater of the shallower aquifers. Groundwater in this area
         of the Mahomet contains little modern recharge and no evidence exists of any anthropogenic
         contaminants [22].
      
      Figure 1. Map of the east-central Illinois region of the Mahomet aquifer showing the location
            of the wells sampled in this study.
      Before filtering suspended cells from groundwater or deploying in situ “traps” of
         sterilized sediment to sample attached microbes, stagnant water was pumped out of
         the well at a rate of 8&nbsp;L&nbsp;min-1 using a Grundfos® Redi-Flo II electric submersible pump. During pumping, the pH, temperature and electrical
         conductivity were monitored using an Oakton pH/CON 300 Meter (Oakton Instruments,
         Vernon Hills, IL) and recorded at three minute intervals. No samples were taken until
         readings for all three parameters stabilized for three consecutive measurements. All
         groundwater samples for geochemical analyses were filtered in the field using a 0.2&nbsp;μm
         pore size Supor-200® polyethersulfone membrane (Pall Life Sciences). For analysis of dissolved inorganic
         carbon (DIC), 3&nbsp;mL of groundwater was collected using a degassed syringe, then injected
         into a stoppered 70&nbsp;mL serum bottle previously purged using O2-free, ultrapure N2 gas and 2&nbsp;g of crystalline phosphoric acid (H3PO4). Samples for dissolved organic carbon (DOC) analyses were stored in amber glass
         bottles and preserved using sulfuric acid (0.5%&nbsp;v/v). Samples were stored on water
         ice in a sealed cooler for transport to the lab and kept refrigerated until they could
         be analyzed.
      
      Microbial cells suspended in groundwater were filtered from two liters of groundwater
         using a 90&nbsp;mm Supor-200® filtration membrane. After collecting duplicate filters and immediately freezing
         them on dry-ice, an in situ sediment trap containing sterilized aquifer solids (see
         Additional file 1) was lowered into each well where it could be colonized by native microbes [15]. Sediment traps were lowered to the depth of the screened interval of each well and
         retrieved after 98 to 137&nbsp;days of incubation, allowing active microbial populations
         to colonize the initially-sterile solids [24]. Upon retrieval, sediment samples were immediately placed into separate sterile Whirl-Pak® bags and stored in coolers filled with dry ice. All microbiological samples (filters
         and sediments) were transported to the laboratory within four hours whereupon they
         were transferred to a -80°C freezer and stored awaiting further analysis.
      
      Additional file 1: Table S1. Energy available for microbial respiration. Figure S1. Collectors curves showing how the total richness of the bacterial community increases
         with greater sampling depth. Figure S2. Collectors curves showing how the total richness of the archaeal community increases
         with greater sampling depth. Figure S3. Available energy (∆GA) for either the anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) or methanogenesis with increasing
         amounts of dihydrogen (H2) in Mahomet aquifer groundwater. Figure S4. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) ordination of the Bray-Curtis coefficients of similarity
         for attached microbial communities in the Mahomet aquifer. Figure S5. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) ordination of the Bray-Curtis coefficients of similarity
         for suspended microbial communities in the Mahomet aquifer.
         	Format: DOCX 
         	Size: 460KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Aqueous concentrations of methane and hydrogen in groundwater were determined using
         passive diffusion sampling [25]. In situ gas samplers were equilibrated in an individual well for at least one week
         and then retrieved. Triplicate samples of dissolved gases were immediately injected
         into stoppered, N2-purged serum bottles for storage. The concentrations of major anions (F–, Cl–, Br–, NO3–, PO43–, SO42–) in groundwater samples were measured using a Metrohm Advanced ion chromatograph
         with a detection limit of 10&nbsp;μM (Metrohm USA, Houston, TX). DOC analyses were performed
         at the Illinois Sustainable Technology Center using a Shimadzu TOC-VCPN carbon analyzer
         with a detection limit of 0.4&nbsp;mg&nbsp;kg–1.
      
      Methane and DIC concentrations were measured using an SRI 8610 gas chromatograph (SRI
         International, Menlo Park, CA) coupled to a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and
         a flame ionization detector (FID). TCD measurements were used to determine DIC and
         dissolved methane concentrations greater than &gt;100&nbsp;μM, while the FID was used to measure
         methane &lt;100&nbsp;μM. Hydrogen concentrations were determined using the same GC equipped
         with a reducing gas detector (RGD). The RGD detector produced reliable concentration
         measurements down to 0.5 nM. Gas phase concentrations of CO2, methane and hydrogen within the passive diffusion samplers were converted to aqueous
         phase concentrations using the temperature-corrected Ostwald coefficient [26], taking into account the total dissolved gas pressure in the system as measured using
         a Hydrolab MiniSonde 4a® (Hach Hydromet, Loveland, CO).
      
      Energy available for microbial respiration
      The thermodynamic energy available (∆GA) to particular functional groups of microbes through respiration was calculated according
         to the equation:
      
      
         
               
                  
                     ∆
                     
                        G
                        r
                     
                     =
                     ∆
                     
                        G
                        °
                     
                     
                        
                        T
                     
                     +
                     RT
                     l
                     n
                     
                        
                           ∏
                           i
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       y
                                       i
                                    
                                    ×
                                    
                                       m
                                       i
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 v
                                 i
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               (1)
      
      Where ∆G°T is the standard state free energy change at temperature T (K), R is the universal gas constant, and yi, mi, and vi are the activity coefficients, molal concentrations, and reaction coefficients of
         the species involved in the redox reaction. The ∆GA for a particular functional group of microbes is equal to the amount of free energy
         released by that group’s respiratory reaction (∆Gr). The amount ∆Gr is equal to the sum of the electron donating (∆Gdon) and electron accepting (∆Gacc) half-reactions, and the available energy (∆GA) is therefore the inverse of the energy released (-∆Gr) [27]. The energy available from electron donating and accepting half-reactions was calculated
         in The Geochemist’s Workbench® using the “thermo.dat” database of thermodynamic data compiled by Lawrence Livermore
         National Laboratory [28]. Activity coefficients (yi) were calculated from the overall chemical composition of the groundwater using the
         extended Debye-Hückel equation [29].
      
      Molecular assays and sequence analyses
      Total DNA was extracted from each sediment trap and each filter membrane collected
         from the wells following the method of Tsai and Olson [30] with some minor modifications (see Additional file 1). DNA extracts were used to amplify 16S rRNA genes using bacterial (i.e., 8&nbsp;F and
         787R) and archaeal (i.e., 25&nbsp;F and 958R)-specific primers (see Additional file 1). Amplification products were cloned into pCR4.1 TOPO TA vector following the manufacturer’s
         instructions (Invitrogen™, Carlsbad, CA). Clones were sequenced using the BigDye® Terminator sequencing chemistry (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) as described
         elsewhere [31]. A minimum of 192 clones per sample were processed in this study. Raw sequence data
         was checked for quality and assembled into contigs using Sequencher® v4.10.1 (Gene Codes Corp, Ann Arbor, MI), and then screened for chimeras using Bellerophon
         [32]. For the phylogenetic analyses bacterial and archaeal sequences were aligned using
         the algorithm implemented in the program Mothur [33] against a high-quality reference alignment selected from the Greengenes 16S rRNA
         gene database [34]. Unique, chimera-free reference sequences were chosen from the 12 October 2010 release
         of Greengenes using ARB [35]. Cloned sequences from the Mahomet that aligned poorly to the reference database
         or contained ambiguous base calls were discarded. The phylogeny of archaeal and bacterial
         16S rRNA gene sequences was classified in Mothur using the “Hugenholtz” taxonomic
         nomenclature in Greengenes [34]. Phylogenetic trees were constructed in ARB by adding cloned sequences to the Greengenes
         reference tree [36] using the ARB parsimony algorithm [35].
      
      The community richness of bacteria and archaea in the Mahomet was estimated using
         Mothur [33]. 16S rRNA gene sequences were clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) based
         on an average nucleotide similarity at fixed cutoffs. Sequences with an average nucleotide
         similarity of 97% were binned together into a single OTU. The similarity of individual
         communities of bacterial and archaeal members across the Mahomet was quantified using
         the Bray-Curtis coefficient [37]. Archaeal and bacterial communities were grouped together for these analyses on the
         basis of sample type (attached or suspended) and geochemical zone [15,17,18].
      
      Bacterial and archaeal community composition differences were quantified by calculating
         the Bray-Curtis similarity coefficient and using multidimensional scaling (MDS) to
         create a two dimensional visualization of the extent to which communities differ from
         one another. MDS graphs were plotted using a non-metric configuration in which the
         distance between any two points is inversely proportional to their similarity. All
         MDS analyses were performed using the Primer-6 software package (Primer-E Ltd., Plymouth,
         UK). The overall similarity of the bacterial and archaeal communities within groups
         of wells was calculated using the analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) [38]. Specifically, R-values (RANOSIM) were used to establish the dissimilarity of different paired-groups of microbial
         communities (e.g. communities from no sulfate vs. high sulfate groundwater). RANOSIM &gt; 0.75 indicate two microbial communities (i.e. the attached and suspended communities
         from various wells in an aquifer) have characteristic structures largely distinct
         from one another [39]. A value of RANOSIM between 0.25 and 0.75 indicates communities within each group cluster separately
         from those in the other, with some overlap, while an RANOSIM &lt; 0.25 indicates communities in one group are almost indistinguishable from those
         in the other. SIMPER (similarity percentage) was used to calculate the extent to which
         individual OTUs contribute to the dissimilarity groups sets and to rank the populations
         from most to least responsible for the differences between groups [40,41]. Representative sequences from each OTU were identified using Mothur and identified
         using the Greengenes reference taxonomy as described above. Representative sequences
         were deposited in GenBank under accession numbers KC604413 to KC604575 and KC604576
         to KC607489.
      
   

