Methods
   
      Study design and subjects
      The study population (n = 11,031) for this cross-sectional population-based study
         was formed as follows: in 1989, a baseline postal enquiry was sent to all the 14,220
         female residents born in 1932–41 of Kuopio Province, Finland (OSTPRE Study) [23,24]. The 10-year follow-up enquiry in 1999 was sent to 12,562 women alive and with known
         address out of the 13,100 baseline respondents. This enquiry was returned by 11,537
         women. Out of these 11,537 women, 11,031 women responded to the question determining
         current medication usage in 1999. The study has been approved by the ethics committee
         of Kuopio University Hospital. Informed consent of the study subjects was obtained
         by postal enquiry.
      
      Questionnaire data
      The study questionnaire included questions on marital status, residency (rural/city),
         height, weight, number of chronic health disorders, number of prescribed medications,
         use of hormone therapy (HT) (no/yes), life satisfaction (LS), physical activity (hours
         per week), smoking (no/yes) and consumption of beer, wine and distilled alcoholic
         beverages. The total use of alcohol was computed as grams (12 g/drink) per month and
         categorized (none/&lt;360 g/≥360 g). Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight (kg)/height
         (m) squared and categorized (&lt;25/25-29/≥30 kg/m2). LS was measured with a 4-item scale (range 4–20) [25-29]. It was used as a 3-category variable: 4–6 (satisfied), 7–11 (intermediate) and 12–20
         (dissatisfied) based on the standard deviation of the mean [27]. Education (4-category) was asked on a subsample (n = 3,222) who underwent bone densitometry.
         All these factors were tested as covariates in multivariate analyses.
      
      Participants were asked current medication usage: “Are you at the moment under medication
         prescribed by a doctor? Specify the names of the medications.” The reported medications
         were coded according to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) code [30]. The ATC-categories investigated in the present study were: any psychoactive medications
         (N05, N06), antidepressants (N06A, N06CA) (with or without using other psychoactive
         medications) and other psychoactive medications (N05, N06B, N06CB, N06D) (without
         using antidepressants). In addition, “sole use of antidepressants” was also investigated.
         Purchasing of anti-dementia drugs (ATC: N06D) or psychostimulants/nootropics (N06B)
         during 2000–2005 according to National prescription register was used as memory variable
         (no/yes). Diuretics (C03), which are an independent, usual and regularly used medication
         group, were chosen to serve as a reference for psychoactive medications. Diuretics
         were used as follows: 1) any use (in tables), 2) together with psychoactive medication
         and 3) without psychoactive medication.
      
      Register data
      The study questionnaire data was linked with the National prescription register and
         the National Register for Work Disability Pensions by personal identification codes.
         The prescription register from the Social Insurance Institution of Finland (KELA)
         contains data regarding all reimbursed prescription medicines purchased in any pharmacy
         in Finland. It does not include information on 1) medication use in hospitals or community
         nursing homes, where medicines are included in the services; 2) medications which
         are not reimbursable such as small packages costing under a fixed deductible share
         (i.e. 8.41 € in 1999) unless being a specially refunded medicine due to the selected
         chronic diseases including psychosis [31]. The defined daily doses (DDD) for medical products have been obtained from the Finnish
         Medicines Agency (FIMEA).
      
      History of work disability pension up to the year 1996 (no/due to somatic cause/due
         to psychiatric cause) and medications purchased from a pharmacy within four or within
         12 months before response to the enquiry in 1999 as DDD tertiles were used in the
         analysis. In Finland, only 3 months’ refunded medication can be purchased from pharmacy
         at a time. Thus, a 4-month time window preceding the date of response to enquiry was
         chosen for prescription register data to ensure that a person would purchase a medication
         at least once (if used continuously) [19]. In order to explore the agreement of self-report, also a 12-month time window preceding
         the enquiry and a 4-month time window after the enquiry were applied. For loss analysis,
         the index date for women who did not return the questionnaire was the date the questionnaire
         was sent.
      
      Statistical analyses
      Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS statistical package 17.0 for Windows
         (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Differences between study groups were examined with
         the Chi-squared test and the t-test for independent groups, or, in the case of variables
         not following a normal distribution, the non-parametric Mann–Whitney U-test. Agreement
         between the self-reported use and the National prescription register data as the golden
         standard were analyzed with sensitivity (i.e. recall rate or accuracy), specificity
         and Kappa-values (overall agreement).
      
      To study factors affecting agreement of self-report and register data, logistic regression
         models were used. Only those women who according to the prescription register had
         purchased antidepressants or psychoactive medications were selected. Self-report (no/yes)
         was the outcome measure (i.e. dependent variable). Multivariate analysis was used
         to assess the independent effect of certain personal and health-related factors. Covariates
         were chosen into models if they were significantly associated with outcome. In the
         multivariate model 1, age, marital status, BMI, alcohol consumption and LS were covariates.
         In model 2, additional covariates included history of work disability pension up to
         the year 1996 and number of self-reported prescribed medications as well as amount
         of purchased psychoactive medications from the prescription register.
      
   

