Methods
   
      Study design and population
      We analysed the data for 944 18 to 60-year-old Hindustani Surinamese participants
         in a screening program for the DHIAAN study, a culturally targeted, lifestyle-intervention
         trial. We use the term Hindustani Surinamese to refer to people with South Asian ancestral
         origin who migrated to the Netherlands via Suriname and their offspring. The Hindustani
         Surinamese are the descendants of the indentured labourers from North India – Uttar
         Pradesh, Uttaranchal, and West Bihar – between 1873 and 1917. The two large migration
         waves, around 1975 and 1980, of Hindustani Surinamese to the Netherlands were caused
         mainly by the political situation in Suriname 
         					[16].
      
      The methods of the study have been described elsewhere 
         					[17]. In brief, potential participants were selected from 48 family physician lists in
         The Hague by means of name analysis. All who were not already known to have diabetes
         received an invitation followed by a written reminder and up to five contact attempts
         by telephone. Volunteers could also make an appointment for the screening. The participation
         rate was 21.8% (Figure&nbsp;
         					1). Because oral glucose tolerance was only tested between 18 May 2009 and 19 April
         2010, we only used data for those participating during this period (n = 968). Participants who had not completed the OGTT or whose HbA1c measurement was
         missing were excluded, leaving 944 participants (Figure&nbsp;
         					1).
      
      Figure 1. Flow diagram from eligibility assessment to inclusion in analyses. Legend: * All participants underwent an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) between
         18 May 2009 and 19 April 2010. Oral glucose tolerance was no longer tested after April
         2010.
      
      The Institutional Review Board of the Academic Medical Centre of the University of
         Amsterdam approved the study. All participants provided written informed consent.
      
      Data collection
      Participants completed a brief questionnaire about demographics (e.g. country of birth),
         known risk factors (e.g. family history) and cardiovascular health. Furthermore, a
         physical examination was carried out. Weight was recorded to the nearest 500 g. Height
         and waist circumference were measured to the nearest 0.01 m. We calculated the body
         mass index (BMI; kg/m2) from the weight and height. Blood pressure was measured with the participant in
         the seated position (OmronM5-1, Omron, Hoofddorp, the Netherlands). A maximum of five
         measurements were taken. We calculated the mean from the first two measurements with
         less than 5 mmHg difference.
      
      We also asked the participants to donate a fasting blood sample and to undergo an
         OGTT (the glucose load was 75 g). We analysed the following elements:
      
      1. Fasting plasma glucose. We used the hexokinase method. The samples were collected
         in BD Vacutainers Fluoride/EDTA Tubes, centrifuged and analysed on a Roche Modular
         Analytics P (Roche Diagnostics Nederland, Almere, The Netherlands) on the same day.
      
      2. HbA1c. We used high-performance liquid chromatography (DCCT aligned) and analysed
         the samples on a Tosoh G7 analyser (Tosoh Europe BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands),
         and Menarini HA-8160 (A. Menarini Diagnostics Benelux NV, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands)
         on the day of collection. The variation coefficients were 84 mmol/mol ± 2.0% and 33
         mmol/mol ± 2.0%. The Hb variants HbS, HbD, and HbC were automatically reported. HbE
         and HbJ were verified manually.
      
      3. Insulin. We used the sandwich immunoassay, analysed on a Roche Modular Analytics
         E170 P (Roche Diagnostics Nederland, Almere, The Netherlands).
      
      Furthermore, a 2-h standard 75-g OGTT was performed. We used the HOMA Calculator (University
         of Oxford) 
         					[18] to determine the insulin sensitivity [in %; homeostasis model assessment (HOMA)-s]
         and beta cell function (in %; HOMA-b) from fasting plasma glucose and insulin levels
         (pmol/l).
      
      We used American Diabetes Association recommendations to classify prediabetes and
         diabetes 
         					[5,19]. We defined the criteria for diagnosing diabetes on the basis of the OGTT as a fasting
         plasma glucose value of 126 mg/dl (7.0 mmol/l) or more and/or a 2-h postload glucose
         value of 200 mg/dl (11.1 mmol/l). We defined the criteria for diagnosing prediabetes
         as a fasting plasma glucose value of 100–125 mg/dl (5.6–6.9 mmol/l) and/or a 2-h postload
         glucose value of 140–199 mg/dl (7.8–11.1 mmol/l) 
         					[5,19]. Furthermore, the criterion for diagnosing of diabetes on the basis of the Hb1Ac
         level was a value of 6.5% (48 mmol/mol) or more, and for prediabetes, an HbA1c level
         of 5.7%-6.5% (39–48 mmol/mol).
      
      Statistical analysis
      First, we described the population characteristics with medians plus interquartile
         ranges or percentages. We also calculated the prevalence of diabetes and prediabetes.
         We determined the overlap between the classifications for diabetes and prediabetes,
         which we defined as the number of cases identified with both the HbA1c level and the
         OGTT divided by all cases identified with the HbA1c level.
      
      Second, we calculated the area under the receiver-operator characteristic curve (AUROC)
         and the 95% confidence intervals for HbA1c to identify OGTT-defined diabetes. We chose
         the OGTT as a reference on the basis of the local recommendations at the time the
         study was initiated. We identified the optimal HbA1c threshold for diabetes by interpolating
         from the AUROC; we selected the point that maximised sensitivity and specificity by
         inspecting the cross-tabulations of the sensitivity and specificity. We then calculated
         the sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value (PPV) for HbA1c at the
         recommended and optimal thresholds, with 95% confidence intervals based on bootstrap
         methods using 2000 samples 
         					[20]. After excluding participants with diabetes, we did the same for prediabetes.
      
      Third, we compared those with prediabetes or diabetes according to the recommended
         thresholds for HbA1c with individuals who only met the recommended OGTT (but not HbA1c)
         criteria. For this, we used Kruskal-Wallis tests and Mann–Whitney U tests. For reference,
         we also presented the characteristics of participants whom we could not classify with
         any of the tests. After excluding all participants with diabetes according to either
         the HbA1c level or the OGTT, we did the same for prediabetes. We used SPSS 18.0 (Chicago,
         Illinois) and R2.10.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2009) for the statistical
         analyses.
      
   

