Methods
   
      Low-temperature tolerance assays and RNA preparation
      The tea plant cultivar ‘Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze cv. Longjing 43’ was planted in the China National Germplasm Hangzhou Tea Repository (CNGHTR) at
         the Tea Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (TRI, CAAS).
         Starting in October 2010, intact mature leaves were selected in every 10–15 days until
         March 2011, when the average temperature became higher than 15°C. All samples were
         washed with distilled deionized water and divided into two parts, one for −80°C storage
         using liquid nitrogen for quick freezing and the other for evaluating low-temperature
         tolerance using an electrolyte leakage assay. RNAprep pure Plant Kit (Tiangen, Beijing,
         China) was used for total RNA extraction, and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer was used to
         test the RNA integrity with a minimum integrity value of 8.
      
      The low-temperature tolerance was determined from leaf samples by electrolyte leakage
         assay similar with previous study [71]. Briefly, leaves were washed with deionized water. Leaf samples (5 mm in diameter)
         were extracted using a hole puncher and the midvein of the leaf was excluded. Leaf
         samples (0.5 g) were placed in closed vials containing 20 ml of deionized water and
         incubated at 25°C on a rotary shaker for 24 h. Then the electrical conductivity of
         the solution (L1) was determined. Samples were then autoclaved at 100°C for 20 min
         and the final electrical conductivity (L2) was determined after equilibration at 25°C.
         The EL (relative electrical conductivity) was defined as follows: EL (%) = (L1/L2×100%).
         Based on the level of electrolyte leakage, three samples including non-acclimated
         (CK, the date for sample collection was 1st December, 2010), fully acclimated (CA1,
         the date was 29th December, 2010) and de-acclimated (CA3, the date was 1st March,
         2011) were selected for RNA-Seq and DGE analyses.
      
      Library preparation and RNA-Seq
      The samples for RNA-Seq were prepared using Illumina’s kit and following manufacturer’s
         recommendations. In short, mRNA was purified from 20 μg of total RNA using oligo (dT)
         magnetic beads, followed by fragmentation, in which the mRNA is fragmented into small
         pieces using divalent cations under elevated temperature. The cleaved RNA fragments
         were used for first-strand cDNA synthesis using reverse-transcriptase and random primers
         followed by second-strand cDNA synthesis using DNA polymerase I and RNase H. After
         the end repair process and ligation of adapters, the products were enriched by PCR
         to create the final cDNA library.
      
      The cDNA library was sequenced from both 5′ and 3′ ends using the Illumina HiSeq™
         2000 platform according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The fluorescent image
         processing, base-calling and quality value calculation were performed by the Illumina
         data processing pipeline 1.4, in which 290 bp paired-end reads were obtained.
      
      Short-read RNA-Seq datasets
      In our study, we performed RNA-Seq for three samples from tea plants that represented
         three key stages during the CA process, including CA1, CA3 and CK. We called these
         dataset 1. The accession code of our RNA-Seq dataset is SRA061043. The previous study
         reported the transcriptome of C. sinensis, with 75 bp paired-end reads produced from the Illumina GAII platform, and we called
         this dataset 2. Its accession code is SRX020193, which includes samples from seven
         different tissues of C. sinensis: tender shoots, young leaves, mature leaves, stems, young roots, flower buds and
         immature seeds [21]. Furthermore, we combined dataset 1 and dataset 2 together as dataset 3 in order
         to compare the outcomes from de novo assembly using different datasets.
      
      Preprocessing and de novo assembly
      
      Raw data is preprocessed before de novo assembly: low-quality nucleotides (we defined nucleotides with a quality score less
         than 20 as low-quality nucleotides) in the last 20 cycles and ambiguous nucleotides
         in the first five cycles were trimmed by custom PERL script. After preprocessing,
         we obtained a total of ~ 4.96 G bases (Gb), ~ 1.90 Gb and ~ 6.86 Gb quality filtered
         short reads for dataset 1, dataset 2 and dataset 3, respectively.
      
      De novo assemblies for these three datasets were performed separately by Trinity (release
         20110713) [20]. The command-line parameters are “--seqType fq --left 1.fq --right 2.fq --paired_fragment_length
         300 --min_contig_length 100 --run_butterfly --output RNASeq_Trinity --CPU 8”.
      
      Removal of redundancy
      Some isoforms reconstructed by Trinity with the same “chrysalis component” and “butterfly
         sub-component” had only small variations, such as SNPs, small insertions or deletions;
         such variations introduced redundancies for the assembly outcomes. CD-HIT-EST [72] was used to remove the shorter redundant transcripts when they were entirely covered
         by other transcripts with more than 99% identity. This set of transcripts was then
         used to count the basic assembly statistics and for downstream analysis.
      
      Gene annotation and classification
      All non-redundant transcripts (≥ 100 bp) were used to search against the NR, UniRef90
         [22], TAIR10, KEGG (version 58) [23] and KOG [24] databases by BLASTALL package (release 2.2.22) with the significant threshold of
         E-value ≤ 10-5. Each known gene from the best BLASTx hit was parsed and assigned. Gene ontology
         (GO) [73] terms for each transcript were assigned based on the best BLASTx hit from the NR
         database using Blast2GO software (version 2.3.5) [25] with an E-value threshold of 10-5.
      
      The ORF of assembled transcripts was determined based on the results of BLASTx search
         in the following order: NR, UniRef90, KEGG and KOG. Extending from both sides of the
         aligned region, the coding region sequences were translated into amino acid sequences
         with the standard codon table using custom PERL scripts. For those transcripts without
         any BLASTx hit against known databases, the best potential coding region was predicted
         using the software BestORF with parameters trained on Arabidopsis ESTs. The predicted amino sequences were submitted to search against the Pfam database
         (version 25.0) [74] for domain/family annotation using HMMER 3.0, with the ‘Best Match Cascade’ protocol.
         The “optimising allowed match overlap” method [75] was used to resolve complex overlapping protein domains.
      
      Mapping reads to transcripts
      In order to get assembly statistics for the ratio of number of reads that could be
         mapped back to transcripts (mapping ratio), bowtie (version 0.12.7) [76] was used to align short reads to the reconstructed transcripts, with parameters “-q
         --solexa1.3-quals --fr −1 fq1 -2 fq2 -k 1 -v 3 -X 300”. Custom PERL scripts were used
         to summarize the aligned results.
      
      Calculation of gene expression level
      RSEM (v1.1.11) [27] was used to quantify transcript abundance in each sample, with parameters “--phred64-quals
         --estimate-rspd --calc-ci --out-bam --fragment-length-min 100 --fragment-length-max
         350” , and then the RSEM-estimated fragment counts were fed into DESeq package (1.0.6)
         [28] to get the ‘baseMean’ value. The false discovery rate (FDR) of each comparison (CA1
         vs. CA3 and CA1 vs. CK) was calculated by the winflat program which implements a rigorous
         statistical analysis described by Audic and Claverie [18]. The FDR ≤ 0.01 and the absolute value of log2 ratio ≥ 1 were used as the threshold
         of significant differences in gene expression. Those genes that were significantly
         differentially expressed in both CA1 vs. CK and CA1 vs. CA3 were identified as potentially
         related to CA.
      
      Digital gene expression
      Tag library preparation for three samples was performed in parallel using the Illumina
         gene expression sample preparation kit. Briefly, 6 μg total RNA from each sample was
         used for mRNA capture with magnetic oligo (dT) beads. First- and second-strand cDNA
         were synthesized. Bead-bound cDNA was subsequently digested with NlaIII. The cDNA fragments with 3' ends were then purified with magnetic beads, and the
         Illumina adapter 1 was ligated to their 5' ends. The junction of the Illumina adapter
         1 and CATG site is the recognition site of MmeI, which cuts the cDNA at 17 bp downstream
         of the CATG site, producing tags linked with adapter 1. After removing 3' fragments
         with magnetic beads precipitation, the Illumina adaptor 2 was ligated to the 3' ends
         of tags. The ligation products were enriched by PCR amplification (15 cycles) and
         purified by 6% TBE PAGE Gel electrophoresis. Sequencing was carried out on the Illumina
         HiSeq™ 2000 platform, as recommended by the manufacturer, for 35 cycles.
      
      Raw image data was transformed by base calling into sequence data. Adaptor sequences
         were removed by custom PERL scripts and low-quality tags with ambiguous nucleotide(s)
         were discarded. All remaining tags were then aligned to the reconstructed transcripts
         by bowtie with parameters “-a -f -v 0”. Tags that could not be uniquely aligned were
         discarded. For gene expression analysis, the number of expressed tags was counted
         and then normalized to TPM.
      
      Quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis
      In order to validate the reliability of RNA-Seq and DGE experiments, 28 transcripts
         were selected for quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) test. The RNA (1 μg) of each sample
         was treated with DNase I (Tiangen, China), then real-time PCR was performed using PrimeScriptTM RT reagent qPCR Kit fromTakara (Dalian, China) under the following parameters: 95°C
         for 30 s, 40 cycles at 94°C for 15 s, 60°C for 34 s. Fluorescence intensity was measured
         using the Applied Biosystems 7300 Sequence Detection System (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Triplicates
         of each reaction were performed. To ensure the robustness of the reference gene used
         in the qRT-PCR experiment, we analyzed the gene expression stability of 4 commonly
         used housekeeping genes (18S RNA, β-Actin, GAPDH and α-Tubulin) across the cold acclimation
         process. As previously reported by others [77], our results also showed that the 18S RNA gene was the most stable one for its constant
         expression levels and was finally chosen as the reference gene in our study. The relative
         expression of the genes in the three samples was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method described earlier [78]. The result of the qRT-PCR was presented as fold changes in gene expression relative
         to that of CK sample. So, the relative value of CK is 1 and the relative values of
         CA1 and CA3 samples were normalized to that of CK sample. All data are shown as the
         mean ± SD and all primer information is provided in Additional file 6.
      
      Additional file 6. List of designed primers for quantitative RT-PCR.
         	Format: XLSX 
         	Size: 13KB Download file or  display content in a new window
   

