Methods
   
      Tumor donors
      Chemotherapy-naïve primary tumor samples were selected from the Colorado State University
         (CSU) Flint Animal Cancer Center’s tissue archive. Samples are archived with owner
         consent and approval by the CSU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Twenty
         tumors from good- and poor-responders (n = 10 each group) were selected following
         the protocol previously published [32]. Briefly, chemotherapy-naïve primary OSA samples were from dogs treated with surgical
         amputation followed by chemotherapy with doxorubicin and/or a platinum based drug
         (distribution of choice of drug was not significantly different between groups). All
         twenty dogs were free of thoracic metastases by radiographic analysis at diagnosis
         and follow up consisted of evaluation by clinical examinations including thoracic
         radiographs every 2–3&nbsp;months after initial treatment. Disease free interval (DFI)
         was calculated from surgery until development of metastatic disease and samples were
         identified for cohorts of good responders (DFI &gt; 300&nbsp;days) and poor responders (DFI &lt; 100&nbsp;days)
         in order to flank the median DFI (200&nbsp;days). Nine additional appendicular OSA tumor
         samples were collected from which matched normal metaphyseal bone was harvested from
         the same limb (at least one joint space away from the tumor) following amputation.
         These nine matched samples were collected at amputation as cases came in (convenience
         sample) and absence/presence of metastasis, post-operative treatment, and patient
         follow-up were less consistent in this population. Tumor and normal bone fragments
         collected at amputation were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.
         Tumor fragments were also fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24&nbsp;hours with
         subsequent routine processing and paraffin embedding.
      
      Immunohistochemical HES1 expression was also assessed in a subset of canine appendicular
         OSA patients from a previously reported multi-institutional randomized prospective
         clinical trial [33]. The study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the
         participating institutions. All dogs underwent amputation followed by 5&nbsp;cycles of
         adjuvant doxorubicin, with or without an investigational matrix metalloprotease inhibitor.
         Inclusion/exclusion criteria, staging, and follow-up procedures were standardized
         and tumor tissues were processed as previously reported [33]. Histologic grading (from 1 to 3) was performed by one author (BEP) utilizing a schema
         incorporating amount of matrix, percent necrosis, nuclear pleomorphism, nucleolar
         size/number and mitosis score [33]. Mitotic index was calculated by counting the number of mitotic figures per 10 random
         400× fields.
      
      Cell culture
      Canine cell lines used in this study were provided by Dr. Douglas Thamm; all cell
         lines were validated for species and genetic identity using short-tandem-repeat (STR)
         profiling as previously described [34]. Human OSA cell lines were obtained from Dr. Douglas Thamm (MG63, SAOS-2, SJSA-1),
         Dr. Hue Luu (MG63.2), or purchased from ATCC (U2OS). The MG63.2 cell line is a metastatic
         sub-line of the MG63 line, obtained via serial passage of rare lung metastases from
         MG63 [35]. All non-purchased cell lines were validated prior to use using STR profiling by
         the University of Colorado DNA Sequencing Shared Resource. Cells were cultured in
         C10 media (DMEM high glucose with 4&nbsp;mM&nbsp;L-glutamine (Hyclone Laboratories, Inc.), 1&nbsp;mM
         of sodium pyruvate, 2× MEM vitamins, 1× MEM non-essential amino acids, 1× antibiotic-antimycotic
         (100×: 10,000&nbsp;IU/ml penicillin, 10,000 ug/ul streptomycin and 25ug/ml) (all additives
         from Mediatech, Inc.), and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Atlas Biologicals, Fort Collins,
         CO).
      
      RNA extraction
      Total RNA was extracted from tumors and RT-qPCR was conducted as described previously
         [32]. Briefly, samples were freeze-fractured, homogenized, extracted with Trizol reagent
         (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and purified with RNeasy clean up (Quiagen, Valencia, CA)
         following manufacturer’s protocols. RNA was extracted from normal bone using the same
         protocol with an additional spin of 800× g at 4°C for 5&nbsp;minutes following homogenization. The supernatant was carried forward
         through the Trizol protocol. Total RNA was extracted from human and canine OSA cells
         using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen) per the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA was quantified
         via spectrophotometry and bioanalyzed for integrity as described in O’Donaghue et
         al. [32] with samples used having a RNA integrity number of at least 8. Human adult osteoblast
         total RNA was purchased from CELL Applications, Inc.
      
      Reverse transcriptase PCR and quantitative real time PCR
      cDNA synthesis was completed using the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen)
         with 1 or 3&nbsp;μg input RNA. RT-qPCR of cDNA was run using iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad)
         and 25&nbsp;ng equivalent RNA input in 25&nbsp;μL reactions on a Stratagene Mx3000P instrument.
         Expression in canine cells and tissues was normalized to hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase
         1 (HPRT1) expression. HPRT1 was selected based on its consistent moderate expression in our sample sets in prior
         microarray and RT-qPCR analysis (see Additional file 1 and reference [32]) and its previous use as a canine reference gene [36]. Consistent with current recommendations for the selection of reference genes and
         because no single reference gene exhibited unchanged expression between samples, expression
         in human OSA cells was normalized to the geometric mean of four reference genes; ribosomal
         protein S15 (RBS15), glyceraldehyde-3-dehydrogenase (GAPDH), 18S ribosomal RNA (18SrRNA) and HPRT1[37]. Primer sequences and efficiencies for all genes and the full sequence of the canine
         HES1 amplicon are listed in Additional file 2. Primers were designed using Primer-Blast based upon NCBI RefSeq mRNA sequences when
         available. Primers were designed to be intron spanning when possible and cross-checked
         for specificity via UCSC in silico PCR. Primers were further validated with standard
         curves to calculate efficiency, and dissociation curves as previously described [34]. RT-qPCR products were validated for size by agarose gel electrophoresis and sequenced
         to confirm identity. The 161&nbsp;bp canine HES1 amplicon revealed 98% homology to the human homolog of HES1. Human HES1 primers used were the same as those used by Zhang et al. [24]. The identity of the 200&nbsp;bp amplicon was verified as human HES1 by dideoxy sequencing (CSU DNA sequencing Core).
      
      Additional file 1. Affymetrix Canine 2.0 microarray data processed with PLIER algorithm. Selected Notch signaling pathway genes from Affymetrix Canine 2.0 microarray data
         including both previously published [35] and unpublished data (normal bone).
         	Format: XLSX 
         	Size: 137KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Additional file 2. Sequences, amplicon sizes, and efficiencies of primer pairs used in RT-qPCR experiments.
         	Format: XLSX 
         	Size: 50KB Download file or  display content in a new window
      Western blot
      Western blot analysis was performed on canine and human OSA cells using whole cell
         lysates or cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions. Whole cell lysates were prepared in
         triethanolamine (TEA) lysis buffer (55&nbsp;mM TEA, pH&nbsp;7.5, 111&nbsp;mM NaCl, and 2.2&nbsp;mM EDTA,
         0.44% SDS) with 1× Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Diagnostics). Protein
         concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo
         Scientific). Nuclear extracts were prepared using a hypotonic 0.5% or 0.25% IgePal
         (NP-40) buffer (10&nbsp;mM Hepes, 1.5&nbsp;mM MgCl, and 10&nbsp;mM KCl). Briefly, harvested cell
         pellets were re-suspended in IgePal buffer with protease inhibitor while vortexing,
         incubated on ice for 0–5&nbsp;minutes, and centrifuged for 5&nbsp;minutes at 500× g. The supernatant (cytoplasmic fraction) was collected and the pellet (nuclear fraction)
         was re-suspended in TEA lysis buffer with protease inhibitors. Samples were separated
         using SDS-PAGE and transferred to a polyvinylidine fluoride membrane. The membrane
         was blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk (NFDM) for one hour at room temperature and incubated
         with rabbit monoclonal anti-HES1 antibody (RabMAb EPR4226, 1:500; Epitomics) in 5%
         bovine serum albumin (BSA) at 4°C overnight. After washing in 0.1% Tween 20-Tris-buffered
         saline (TBST) the membrane was incubated with secondary horseradish peroxidase conjugated
         goat anti-rabbit antibody (1:5000; Bio-Rad) in 5% NFDM for one hour at room temperature.
         SuperSignal West Dura Extended Duration Substrate (Pierce Biotechnology) was used
         to detect chemiluminescent signals. Band intensity from four experiments using whole
         cell lysates from MG63 and MG63.2 cell lines were analyzed using ImageJ software.
         The intensity of the HES1 band was normalized to the corresponding α-tubulin loading
         control.
      
      Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
      IHC to detect HES1 expression was performed on 4&nbsp;μm sections from formalin-fixed paraffin
         embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues using standard immunoperoxidase techniques on charged
         slides with hematoxylin counter stain. Slides with sections were heated at 60°C for
         30&nbsp;minutes, allowed to cool, and deparaffinized with xylene or a citrus based clearing
         solution (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), and rehydrated with descending ethanol concentrations
         in deionized water (100%, 95%, 75% and 50%). Heat induced epitope retrieval was done
         with 10&nbsp;mM sodium citrate buffer (pH&nbsp;6.0) heated in a pressure cooker for 1&nbsp;minute
         at 125°C. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3% hydrogen peroxide at
         room temperature for 5&nbsp;minutes with 3 washes in TBST both before and after. Slides
         were incubated with a non-serum protein block (Background Sniper, Biocare Medical)
         at room temperature for 15&nbsp;minutes followed by incubation with primary antibody overnight
         at 4°C overnight. The primary antibody (anti-HES1 RabMAb, Epitomics) was used at a
         dilution of 1:750 (diluted in Antibody Diluent, Dako). Sections were then incubated
         with a prediluted secondary antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Envision
         and Dual Link System HRP, Dako) for 30&nbsp;minutes at room temperature with 3 TBST washes
         both before and after. Diaminobenzidine (DAB, Ventana Medical Systems) was used as
         a chromogen for immunoreactive complex detection and slides were counterstained with
         hematoxylin.
      
      Sixty-one additional FFPE tumor samples were analyzed for HES1 immunohistochemical
         expression utilizing a protocol similar to that described above with the following
         exceptions: primary antibody was diluted in 2.5% normal goat serum in TBST (1:750
         or 1:375, higher antibody concentration was used in subsequent batches to increase
         immunoreactivity signal), and detection was performed using biotinylated anti-rabbit
         IgG antibody in a Vectastain ABC Kit (Vector Laboratories). The IHC was performed
         in five batches of 8 to 18 slides each with the same antibody dilution used for an
         entire batch. Variations in antibody dilutions were controlled for by inclusion of
         a positive control tumor slide with a total immunoreactivity score of 4 (percent cells
         staining score of 2 and intensity score of 2; Table&nbsp;1). All samples within each batch were scored in reference to the control. Negative
         controls lacking primary antibody were included in each batch.
      
      Table 1. Summary of data for dogs with DFI &gt; 300 and DFI &lt; 100&nbsp;days, including HES1 immunohistochemistry
            score
      HES1 antibody validation was done using human placenta and canine lung and pancreas
         as positive control tissues. Specificity of the primary antibody was verified using
         a HES1 blocking peptide (Epitomics). Briefly, primary antibody was incubated with
         25× (by mass) blocking peptide in antibody diluents (at both 1:375 and 1:750) for
         one hour at room temperature before application to canine control and sample tumor
         slides. Positive and negative controls with sections from the same tissues were incubated
         in parallel.
      
      Immunohistochemical scoring of all slides was performed independently by two authors
         blinded to case information. A positive cell was any neoplastic cell with distinct
         brown staining in the nucleus (stromal cells and endothelial cells were not counted).
         The percentage of positive cells in each sample was estimated based on an average
         of two or more high powered fields and scored as follows, 1: &lt; 50% cells stain positive,
         2: 50-75% cells stain positive, 3: &gt; 75% cells stain positive. Average stain intensity
         ranged from 1 to 3 (lowest to highest intensity). Field location and number were selected
         randomly at the discretion of the individual scorer. The product of the percentage
         and intensity scores made up the overall immunoreactivity score (ranging from 1 to
         9). Both scorers simultaneously reviewed slides with conflicting scores (scores deviating
         by more than 1 in either category) (n = 5) and consensus was reached. After review,
         total scores were averaged for statistical analyses.
      
      Immunocytochemistry (ICC)
      Immunocytochemistry was performed utilizing the same reagents and a similar protocol
         to that used for IHC. Slides were prepared via cytospin and dried overnight. Prior
         to the blocking step cells were fixed with 100% methanol at room temperature for 15&nbsp;minutes,
         allowed to dry, washed in TTBS and incubated in 0.1% TritonX-100 in TBS for 7–12&nbsp;minutes.
         The remainder of the procedure was identical to that used for IHC, but a higher concentration
         of primary antibody (1:250) was used.
      
      Photomicrographs (IHC and ICC) were taken using the Olympus BX51 Research System Microscope
         with an Olympus dp70 Digital Camera System. Minimal additional editing was done in
         Microsoft ® PowerPoint ® for Mac 2011.
      
      Gene expression microarray analysis
      Total RNA from primary OSA tumor samples from dogs with DFI &lt; 100 (n = 8) and DFI &gt; 300
         (n = 7) was analyzed on GeneChip Canine 2.0 Genome Arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara,
         CA) at CSU’s Rocky Mountain Regional Center for Excellence (RMRCE) Genomics Core per
         Affymetrix protocols as described [35]. Normal bone samples (n = 8) were analyzed using an identical protocol. Samples used
         for microarray analysis were a subset of those used for RT-qPCR (microarray samples
         were limited due to array costs). Microarray pre-processing combining the osteosarcoma
         samples with the normal bone samples was conducted using Probe Logarithmic Intensity
         Error (PLIER) estimation algorithms with log2 transformations. Probesets including Notch receptor ligands, effectors, or targets
         of either the canonical Notch pathway or HES1 were selected based on literature review,
         Ingenuity® Systems Pathway analysis, and/or inclusion in The Human Notch Signaling Pathway RT2 Profiler™ PCR Array (SAbiosciences) (Additional file 1). CIMminer was used to generate clustered images of the data from the 75 selected
         probesets with unsupervised clustering on both axes and the following parameters:
         average linkage, Euclidean distance, and quantile binning with median centering of
         the data. Full microarray data for the DFI groups is available through NCBI’s Gene
         Expression Omnibus (GEO) via accession number GSE24251.
      
      Statistics
      Statistical analysis of RT-qPCR and immunohistochemistry data (not including survival
         data) was performed using Prism software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). For RT-qPCR
         data standard curves, dissociation curves and amplification data was collected on
         a Stratagene Mx3000P instrument and analyzed using the Rest2009 software [38]. HES1 RT-qPCR data was also analyzed using the 2(-ΔΔCt) method [39] with similar results. IHC scores for the DFI &gt; 300 and DFI &lt; 100 tumors were analyzed
         with a 2-tailed Fischer’s exact test after separating scores into low expression (total
         score less than 4) and high expression (total score greater than or equal to 4) categories.
         The cut off was based on results of receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) analysis
         of immunohistochemical scores for the DFI &gt; 300 and DFI &lt; 100 groups. Welch t-test in ArrayTrack 3.5.0 with false discovery rate correction for multiple comparisons
         (FDR; based on all array probesets) was used to compare microarray gene expression
         data. Significance was defined as p &lt; 0.05 (Welch t-test) or q &lt; 0.05 (FDR).
      
      Statistical analysis of survival data was performed using a combination of Prism and
         SPSS software version 20 for Macintosh (IBM, Armonk, NY). Correlations between HES1
         expression levels and other markers on a continuous scale were evaluated using linear
         regression analysis. A 2-tailed, unpaired t-test was used to evaluate the association between HES1 expression levels and categorical
         markers. The median DFI was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method, and comparisons
         between groups made using log rank analysis for categorical variables. For continuous
         variables, markers were categorized into a low and high group using the median value
         as the break point. Multivariable Cox regression analysis was then performed, utilizing
         both forward and backward stepwise models. Variables identified with a univariate
         p-value of &lt;0.1 were included in the multivariate analysis. For all other tests, p-values
         of &lt;0.05 were considered significant.
      
   

