
			
				
					Abstract

				
				
					
						Background

					There is an unmet need for treatment options in Chinese patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM). Lenalidomide plus low-dose dexamethasone is effective and generally well tolerated in Caucasian RRMM patients, but no previous study has evaluated this regimen in Chinese RRMM patients.

				
				
					
						Methods

					MM-021 is a phase 2, multicenter, single-arm open-label registration trial conducted to assess the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of lenalidomide plus low-dose dexamethasone in Chinese patients with RRMM. Patients with ≥1 prior antimyeloma therapy received lenalidomide plus low-dose dexamethasone until disease progression or discontinuation. Follow-up of surviving patients continued for ≥1 year after enrollment. The lenalidomide dose was 25 mg/day, and was adjusted according to baseline renal function. Most patients had advanced disease (85.6% had Durie - Salmon stage III) and were heavily pretreated (56.7% had received ≥4 prior regimens; 69.5% prior thalidomide and 63.1% prior bortezomib); 5.3% had immunoglobulin D (IgD) disease.

				
				
					
						Results

					The safety population comprised 199 eligible patients. In the efficacy population (n = 187), the disease control rate (at least stable disease) was 94.7%, and the overall response rate (at least partial response) was 47.6%. High response rates were also achieved in patients who had renal impairment and in those with IgD disease. After a median study follow-up of 15.2 months, the median response duration was 8.8 months (range, 0.4–18.8 months) and median progression-free survival was 8.3 months (95% CI 6.5–9.8). The most common grade 3–4 adverse events (AEs) were anemia (26.1%), neutropenia (25.1%), thrombocytopenia (14.6%), pneumonia (13.1%), leukopenia (9.5%), and decreased neutrophil count (8.5%). AEs led to lenalidomide dose reduction and/or interruption in 40.2% of patients, and treatment discontinuation in about 9% of patients. The pharmacokinetic profile of lenalidomide was similar to that reported in Caucasian and Japanese patients.

				
				
					
						Conclusions

					Lenalidomide plus low-dose dexamethasone was associated with a high response rate and acceptable safety profile in heavily pretreated Chinese patients with RRMM, including those with renal ...