Methods
   
      Participants
      The hypotheses enunciated above are tested using data on a representative and randomly
         sample of young people from the Cameroon Family and Health Survey (CFHS). Although
         the survey was carried out in 1996–1997, it possesses unique information in the African
         context on the timing of parenting practices for assessing the enduring consequences
         of parenting practices on sexual risk-taking of childen at different stages in their
         lifecourse and whether they vary by gender. The CFHS was designed with a theoretical
         approach that considers that risk and protective factors for health behaviors should
         be understood from a dynamic viewpoint, so as to take into account the influences
         of changes in an individual’s family, social, and environmental contexts over the
         life course. The survey was conducted in the Prefecture of Bandjoun, a semi-rural
         and developing area in the Western region of Cameroon. Bandjoun is located about 300
         kilometres from the economic capital (Douala) and the political capital (Yaoundé).
         Bandjoun’s population was estimated at 51,624 inhabitants in 2005 [39]. Its inhabitants are mostly involved in the agricultural and retail sectors of the
         economy. Regarding the norms and sexual practices, this population tends to share
         negative opinions about the sexual activity among unmarried females and males and
         about an open discussion on sexual issues between parents and children [40]. Thus, parent–child communication on sexual issues is not an established practice
         in this population and may be influenced by the socioeconomic status of parents.
      
      Procedure
      The CFHS is a survey of representative and randomly selected respondents from the
         population of Bandjoun aged 10 and older. The sampling procedure was initiated by
         an identification of the population composition of Bandjoun by sex (female and male)
         and by four age groups (10–14, 15–19, 20–49, and 50 or more), based on the information
         given by the latest (1987) Census of Population and Housing of Cameroon preceding
         the survey. All 75 localities forming the prefecture of Bandjoun were nested within
         12 socio-sanitary areas created by the government of Cameroon. The CFHS used a self-weighted
         proportional sampling design. Households were randomly selected in these 12 areas,
         and respondents aged 10 years or older were randomly sampled from these households.
         Only one eligible respondent was randomly selected per household for interviewing,
         which ensured the absence of correlation between individuals at the household level.
         The process of random selection of respondents in selected households was performed
         until a representative sample by sex and four age groups was obtained for each socio-sanitary
         area. The final sample included 2,377 females and males aged 10 years old and older.
      
      The data on parenting practices were collected in a section of the questionnaire entitled
         “family and residential environments”. Forty four questions were asked in order to
         have a full grasp of the characteristics of the family and residential contexts in
         which respondents’ lives were embedded. Each question was formulated in a retrospective
         life history approach, using predefined key moments in the life course to structure
         the respondents’ narratives. These key moments were: age 6, age 12, the moment of
         sexual initiation (for those who ever had sex) and the time of the survey. For each
         of these key moments if applicable, respondents had to provide information regarding
         various aspects of their family and residential environments including: the persons
         with whom they have lived, the attributes of parents/guardians who were responsible
         for their rearing, the quality of the relationship they have had with the parents/guardians,
         and the towns or localities they have lived in. These data do not constitute a “refined”
         reconstruction of respondents’ event histories (i.e. a reconstruction based on a year
         or a month scale). However, their retrospective longitudinal design constitutes a
         precious source of information to stimulate new venues of research in the sub-Saharan
         African context. Each of the selected key moments allows grasping experiences of individuals
         at different developmental stages in their life course.
      
      Ethical considerations and data access
      The National Ethics Committee of Cameroon (Yaoundé, Cameroon) and the Ethics Committee
         of the University of Montreal (Montreal, Canada) provided ethical approval for the
         survey. Moreover, strict confidentiality was maintained about the identity of respondents
         due to the sensitivity of sexuality and reproductive health matters among unmarried
         youths. In fact, interviewers were instructed to respect respondents’ privacy during
         and after the interview. Specifically, interviews were not conducted in the presence
         of parents or guardians. The CFHS data are not openly accessible. The database, created
         and stored by the principal investigator, is available through written permission.
         More details about the survey are available elsewhere [41,42].
      
      Study sample
      This study uses a subsample of unmarried and sexually active respondents aged 15–24
         years old at the time of the survey. This subsample includes 447 individuals, with
         220 (49.2%) males and 227 (50.8%) females. This subsample meets the sample size and
         power calculations criteria required for regression analyses and statistical inference
         [43].
      
      Measurements
      Sexual risk-taking was measured using three survey items: the number of sexual partners in the last
         12 months, the frequency of contraceptive use with sexual partners in the last 12
         months and the tendency of having concurrent occasional partners. The questions were:
         “How many different sexual partners have you had during the last 12 months” – possible
         responses ranged from zero to six and more, “How often do you and/or partner … use
         a contraceptive method during sexual intercourse”, and “Do you usually have concurrent
         occasional sexual partners?” The question on contraceptive use with sexual partners
         did not specify the types of methods (i.e., condom versus other methods). However,
         it did specify use of a contraceptive method to avoid sexually transmitted diseases
         and/or unplanned pregnancy. The strategies used to reduce misreporting of sexual behaviors
         in the CFHS included: (1) stressing that the information to be collected during the
         interview will always remain strictly confidential as prescribed by law; and (2) making
         respondents aware of the importance of providing accurate information that may contribute
         to inform the design of effective sexual and reproductive health interventions.
      
      Four dichotomous variables were created for the analysis: 1) sexually active in the
         last 12 months, 2) multiple partnerships in the last 12 months, 3) consistent use
         of contraceptive with sexual partners in the last 12 months, and 4) usually have concurrent
         occasional sexual partners. Because very few respondents reported systematic use of
         contraceptives, consistent use was defined as “systematic” or “regular” use. A good
         strategy of risk avoidance would, however, require systematic use of contraceptives.
      
      Parenting practices
      Parent–child connectedness was assessed using an item concerning the quality of the relationships with the parent/guardian.
         A question was asked about how the respondent perceived the quality of his/her relationship
         with his/her parent/guardian at each key moment. Possible responses ranged from 1 = “very
         good” to 4 = “difficult”. The variable was reversely coded to obtain a gradient with
         a higher score indicating a higher quality of parent–child relationships.
      
      Parental monitoring was assessed using two items. The first item is the amount of parental knowledge
         regarding out-of-home activities of the respondents. A question was asked about how
         frequent the parents/guardians used to ask about their out-of-home activities at each
         key moment. The second item refers to the amount of parental approval regarding out-of-home
         activities. Respondents were asked a question about how frequent the parents/guardians
         agreed with their out-of-home activities at each key moment. For both questions, responses
         ranged from 1 = “a lot” to 5 = “never”. These two items were also reversely coded
         to create a gradient with a higher score indicating a higher level of parental monitoring.
      
      Parent–child communication was assessed by four “yes or no” questions asking if respondents ever discussed with
         their parents/guardians at each key moment about puberty, sexual education, prevention
         of sexually transmitted infections and HIV/AIDS, and pregnancy prevention. These four
         items were summed; the scores ranged from 0 to 4. Cronbach’s α was .89 at age 12 and
         .84 at the time of the survey.
      
      A summary of these measures of parenting practices is presented in Table&nbsp;2.
      
      Table 2. Items used to measure parenting dimensions in the Cameroon Family and Health Survey
            (CFHS)
      Other variables
      A number of commonly used family background variables are available in the CFHS, and
         we used them in our models since they have been identified in prior research as aspects
         of parenting practices [24]. These variables include: the family structure and the parent/guardian socioeconomic
         characteristics. The family structure was measured by asking: “Were you living with
         your biological parents at …? (each time point)” and “Who were you living with in
         the household at …? (each time point) ». We created a single variable indicating if
         respondents were living with both biological parents, the biological mother only,
         the biological father only, other relatives or with uncorrelated residents. Variables
         capturing the socioeconomic status of parent/guardian include education -- whether
         the parent/guardian had at least a primary level of education, employment -- whether
         the parent/guardian had a paid job, and marital status - whether the parent/guardian
         was married. Note that the information used to create these two variables was collected
         from the respondents.
      
      Gender and age were also included in the analyses as they may influence the association
         between parenting practices and respondents’ sexual risk-taking. Gender was self-reported
         (coded 0 for females and 1 for males). Age corresponds to the respondents’ responses
         in completed years. Other variables added in the models included current school enrolment
         status and religious affiliation which are known correlates of young people’s sexual
         risk-taking in sub-Saharan Africa [12,21].
      
      Data analysis
      Logistic regressions are performed to estimate the odds and standard errors of having
         risky behaviors. Two models are used. The first model tests the effects of parenting
         practices at young ages (assessment at the time of the survey) as well as the effects
         of parenting practices during early adolescence (assessment at age 12). The other
         variables are also fitted in the model. As parenting practices early in the children’s
         life course are expected to be indirectly associated with sexual risk-taking at young
         ages through delayed onset of sexual activity, we use a second model that includes
         a variable related to whether or not the respondent had initiated sex by age 15.
      
   

