Methods
   
      Source of data
      Cross-sectional data were collected from a study called “Gesundes Kinzigtal” (Engl.
         Healthy Kinzigtal), which evaluated an integrated healthcare system [19]. The “Kinzigtal” is a rural region in the Black Forest in Southern Germany. The main
         objective of the “Kinzigtal” project was to improve care through an intensive networking
         of different health care providers and institutions (integrated care). Another special
         focus of the project was to increase patient involvement in clinical decisions. The
         “Kinzigtal” project investigated one intervention and two control groups.
      
      All insurants of the Health Insurance Fund AOK Baden-Württemberg and the Health Insurance
         Fund LKK Baden-Württemberg residing in the area of the Kinzigtal were suitable for
         participation in the study as members of the intervention or the first control group.
         The intervention group consisted of all insurants that were taking part in the “Kinzigtal”
         project at the reference date of 31.03.2007. The first control group consisted of
         insurants living in the same area but not taking part in the project. The second control
         group consisted of insurants living in an area that is comparable to the Kinzigtal
         with respect to healthcare infrastructure, population density, and local economy.
         To ensure that the control groups are comparable to the intervention group regarding
         central characteristics, insurants in these groups were selected by stratification
         of sex, age, kind of insurance, and healthcare costs they induced in the previous
         12&nbsp;months. All selected insurants were invited to participate in the study by a written
         invitation sent by their Health Insurance Fund (a more detailed description available
         in [19]).
      
      The primary objective of the “Kinzigtal” project was to measure the effects of the
         integrated healthcare system on patient involvement and satisfaction with the physician.
      
      We used data from the “Kinzigtal” project for the evaluation of the conceptual model.
         Our analysis is based on the pooled baseline data of all three groups mentioned above.
         The study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Helsinki Declaration
         and with the approval of the ethics committee of the University Medical Center Freiburg
         (157/07).
      
      Data collection
      Participants completed a postal questionnaire to allow for an assessment of relevant
         SDM-related constructs (see Table&nbsp;2): preference for involvement in medical decisions, experienced involvement, decisional
         conflict, and satisfaction with the physician. All data were collected with reference
         to the last clinical encounter of the patient with a physician delivering outpatient
         care. Experienced involvement and decisional conflict were linked to a certain decision
         made during this encounter. On the contrary, preference for involvement and satisfaction
         with the physician were measured as generic constructs.
      
      Table 2. Postal questionnaire
      The following instruments were used to assess the constructs:
      The Autonomy-Preference-Index measures patients’ preferences regarding information and involvement in treatment
         decision-making [21,25]. It consists of 14 items, of which 8 items evaluate the need for information, and
         6 items relate to the preference for involvement. In the present study, only the preference
         for involvement items were analysed. The internal consistency of both the original
         English and adapted German version is satisfactory with a Cronbach’s α of 0.82 and
         0.86, respectively [21,25].
      
      The 9-item-Shared Decision-Making Questionnaire (SDM-Q-9) assesses the extent of patient involvement in the decision-making process
         from the patient’s perspective. The internal consistency of the instrument is high,
         yielding a Cronbach’s α of 0.94 [22].
      
      The Decisional Conflict Scale (DCS) measures uncertainty in making a health-related decision, factors contributing
         to the uncertainty, and effective decision-making [23,26]. Considering these many different facets, the construct of decisional conflict is
         quite heterogeneous. It includes 16 items. Both the internal consistency (Cronbach’s
         α = 0.78) and test-retest reliability (0.81) of the DCS are high.
      
      To measure the patient’s satisfaction with the physician, we adopted an existing questionnaire
         (ZAP, [27]). We used two global items to measure the patient’s satisfaction with his or her
         outpatient care. We added one item to measure the patient’s global satisfaction with
         the quality and extent of information the patient received and another item to assess
         the patient’s global satisfaction with his or her involvement in clinical decisions.
         The resulting scale (ZAPA) had a satisfactory internal consistency with a Cronbach’s
         α of 0.90 [24].
      
      Health-related quality of life, which was accounted for as a covariate, was captured with the SF-12 health survey
         [20]. The SF-12 is a psychometrically sound abbreviated version of the SF-36.
      
      Demographic characteristics were assessed via closed multiple choice items. The patients
         reported their health complaints and reasons for consultation in an open response
         format (free text boxes).
      
      Data analysis
      A path analysis using structural equation modelling [28,29] was employed to explore multiple associations. Data were analysed with AMOS 5 (SPSS
         Inc., Chicago, Illinois). The elements of the conceptual model were included in the
         model as defined a priori based on our theoretical assumptions. To control for their
         possible confounding effects, the influence of the following known measures on the
         central constructs was also modelled: demographic characteristics (age, sex, education),
         clinical characteristics (cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, or endocrinological disease),
         quality of life (mental and physical), and type of the clinical decision to be made
         (diagnostics, therapy, or referral). As these elements are not part of the conceptual
         model, their effects were freely estimated to fit the empirical data of these elements.
         A satisfactory model was developed in a development sub-sample and cross-validated
         in a confirmatory sample (split-half method). The split between the two samples was
         conducted by randomisation. The sub-sample in which the model was developed consisted
         of n = 983 patients; the confirmatory sub-sample comprised n = 930 patients.
      
      Model development was performed in a stepwise process. First, a full path model was
         developed and included the following:
      
      •all associations of central interest according to the model (Figure&nbsp;1),
      
      •all possible additional direct associations between the constructs (effect of involvement
         preference on decisional conflict and on patient satisfaction with the physician,
         as well as the effect of experienced involvement on patient satisfaction),
      
      •all possible causal effects of confounders on SDM-related constructs, and
      •all possible correlations between confounders.
      Second, all correlations between confounders below 0.1 were eliminated, and the model
         was reassessed. Third, all clinically irrelevant causal associations (standardised
         regression coefficients below 0.1) were excluded, and the model was re-calculated.
         These steps were repeated until all of the correlation coefficients and standardised
         regression coefficients in the model exceeded 0.1.
      
      The measurement model (the extent by which reliable constructs were measured) was
         assessed but not modified throughout the analysis because all of the included instruments
         proved to be psychometrically sound in previous studies and because the primary objective
         of the study was to examine associations between the SDM-related constructs and not
         to improve their measurement.
      
      To describe the measurement model, local goodness-of-fit indexes were calculated.
         To describe the whole model, global goodness-of-fit measures were assessed [30-34].
      
      An additional sensitivity analysis was conducted to test for possible model differences
         among the investigated groups. In this analysis, we fitted the statistical model to
         each of the three groups separately and investigated group differences with regard
         to the standardized regression weights. Thus, the consistency of our results (that
         were based on the pooled sample of the three groups) was tested additionally in the
         three original subgroups.
      
   

