Methods
   
      Cell lines and culture conditions
      The human neuroblastoma (NB) cell line SK-N-AS (American Type Culture Collection,
         Manassas, VA) was maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Hyclone, Fisher
         Scientific, Savannah, GA) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals, Lawrenceville,
         GA) and 2 mM L-glutamine (Hyclone, Fisher Scientific, Savannah, GA) at 37°C and 10%
         CO2. Parent SK-N-AS cells and stable transfectants were cultured under the same conditions.
         Human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMVEC) were obtained from Lonza, Inc.
         (Allendale, NJ), and the human bone marrow endothelial cell line, HBMEC-28, was provided
         by Dr. E. van der Schoot (Sanquin Blood Supply Foundation, The Netherlands) [23]. HDMVEC cells were grown in gelatin-coated culture flasks in Endothelial Cell Grown
         Medium (EGM) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS. HBMEC-28 cells were propagated
         in medium prepared using the EGM™ BulletKit™ (Lonza) according to the directions of
         the manufacturer.
      
      Plasmids encoding human ICAM-2 and ICAM-2 variants
      The plasmid encoding human ICAM-2 was generated as published [13]. Briefly, cDNA encoding ICAM-2 was generated from RNA isolated from human umbilical
         vein endothelial cells (Clonetics, San Diego, CA). Primers for full length ICAM-2
         were: forward (5'GCTTCCGCTGCCTGGATTCT3') and reverse (5'AAGTCCAGGTGTTGTATTC3'). Amplification
         was performed at 95°C for 1 min; then 30 cycles of 94°C for 30 sec, 55°C for 30 sec,
         72°C for 1 min, followed by 72°C for 7 min. The resulting cDNA was isolated after
         electrophoresis in agarose gels, sequenced in its entirety by automated sequencing
         methods (St. Jude Hartwell Center for Bioinformatics, Memphis, TN), and subcloned
         into the BamH1 restriction site of the expression plasmid pIRESneo2 (Clontech, San
         Jose, CA) to generate pIRES.ICAM-2. Plasmid transfections were carried out using FuGene6
         (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN). Forty-eight hours after transfection, 750 μg/ml
         geneticin (G418; Roche Diagnostics Corporation, Indianapolis, IN) was added to select
         transfected cell populations. The use of a vector containing an internal ribosomal
         entry site (IRES) between the ICAM-2 cDNA and the gene encoding the G418 resistance
         protein eliminated the need to isolate and characterize multiple individual clonal
         cell lines. The ICAM-2 cDNA sequence was verified as error-free in the resulting cell
         line (SK-N-ASpIRES.ICAM-2) by the St. Jude Hartwell Center.
      
      Mutagenesis and nomenclature of ICAM-2 variants
      The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of the glycosylation status
         of ICAM-2 on the function in NB tumor cells. Therefore, mutagenesis by overlapping
         PCR, using Pfu polymerase (QuickChange mutagenesis kit; Stratagene-Agilent Tech, Wilmington,
         DE) and pIRES.ICAM-2 as a template, was performed to replace some or all of the six
         asparagine glycosylation sites with alanine residues at positions 47, 82, 105, 153,
         176, and 187, each of which is glycosylated in the endogenous wild-type protein. Alanine
         was chosen for substitution at all six or of a subset of glycosylation sites to prevent
         glycosylation [24-26]. Plasmids encoding mutated variants of ICAM-2 cDNA were identified by restriction
         enzyme analysis and sequences confirmed by direct DNA sequencing. Transfection of
         plasmids encoding ICAM-2 variants into SK-N-AS cells, selection of transfected cells,
         and culture conditions were the same as for SK-N-ASpIRES.ICAM-2 transfectants. Plasmids
         and transfected cell lines are designated as glycosylation site variants (gsv) followed
         by the positions of the amino acids (asparagines) that were replaced with alanine.
         For example, gsv1,4,5 is non-glycosylated at amino acids 47, 153 and 176 (Figure&nbsp;1). In Figures&nbsp;2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8, transfected SK-N-AS cell lines expressing variant forms of ICAM-2 are referred to
         as the specific variant expressed: gsv1,4,5; gsv1,2,5; gsv4,5; and gsv1-6. SK-N-AS
         cells expressing ICAM-2 WT are labeled in the Figures as “WT”. SK-N-ASpIRESneo2 control
         transfectants are labeled “neo”.
      
      Figure 2. Transfected SK-N-AS cells express ICAM-2 transcripts and proteins. A) RNA from control human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMVEC) generated
         RT-PCR products of the predicted 631 base pairs. All ICAM-2 transfectants contained
         readily detectable ICAM-2 RNA. B) Bar graph depicting quantitation of the RT-PCR products shown in “A”. RNA expression
         levels were within 20% among the transfectants. This level of variability was not
         statistically significant. C) Immunoblots of whole cell lysates (40 μg protein/lane) demonstrated that control
         HBMEC-28 cells and WT transfectants expressed immunoreactive protein having an apparent
         molecular mass of 55-60 kDa. ICAM-2 variants expressed proteins of appropriately lesser
         apparent masses.  Transfectants expressed equivalent levels of actin and α-actinin.
         D) Deglycosylation of proteins in whole cell lysates and subsequent immunoblots for
         ICAM-2 confirmed that all variants displayed the expected apparent molecular mass
         of ~30kDa. The “nonspecific” band that appears at ~36kDa in all lanes marked + PNGase
         F is the PNGase F protein itself. E) Quantitation of ICAM-2 variants (lanes indicated as + PNGase F) was done to compare
         relative amounts of ICAM-2 protein expressed by transfectants. Results were normalized
         to the level of actin expression for each cell line. F) ICAM-2 WT and variants localized to cell membranes. Experimental details are included
         in Methods. G) Membrane localization of ICAM-2 WT and gsv4,5 was confirmed by fluorescence activated
         cell sorting (FACS) of intact cells, incubated with an antibody recognizing the extracellular
         domain (ED) of ICAM-2 (CBR-IC2/2) and a PE-conjugated secondary antibody. Non-intact
         cells were gated out using light scatter parameters and propidium iodide uptake. FACS
         profiles shown are for PE-positive cells generated using negative control IgG (blue
         line) or anti-ICAM-2 (red line). H) Biotinylation experiments also demonstrated that ICAM-2 WT and variants localized
         to cell membranes. Experimental details are included in Methods.
      
      Figure 3. Morphology of ICAM-2 variants derived from SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells. Cells plated at low density (~20% confluence) in CoStar tissue culture flasks were
         cultured at 37°C at 5% CO2 in humidified chambers, and allowed to proliferate to ~70% confluence. SK-N-AS cells
         transfected to express WT or gsv ICAM-2 have nascent neuronal morphologies. In comparison
         to SK-N-ASpIRES.ICAM-2 transfectants (WT), gsv transfectants were morphologically
         more pleomorphic and discohesive. All transfectants grew as attached monolayers. When
         detached and sized using a Coulter Counter, no differences in cell size were observed.
      
      Figure 4. ICAM-2 WT and glycosylation variants inhibit NB cell migration in scratch assays. Expression of WT and gsv ICAM-2 inhibited SK-N-AS cell motility in vitro. A) Scratch assays to evaluate cell motility were performed using standard methods,
         and images acquired at 24 hour intervals. At each time point, the distance remaining
         across the scratch was calculated in pixels. Only wells in which initial scratches
         were of similar width were included in analyses. B) Analysis by two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post test showed that at 72 hours
         post scratch, all variants except gsv4,5 migrated more slowly than transfectants that
         expressed no detectable ICAM-2 (neo) (P &lt; 0.05* [gsv1-6] and P &lt; 0.001*** [gsv1,4,5
         and gsv1,2,5]). At 72 hours post scratch, all gsv transfectants migrated more rapidly
         than transfectants expressing ICAM-2 WT (P&lt;0.01 – P&lt;0.001, P values not indicated
         on graph).
      
      Figure 5. The cellular distribution of F-actin in control transfectants (neo) differs from that
            of transfectants expressing ICAM-2 WT. A) Control neo transfectants harbored transverse actin fibers. ICAM-2 WT induced juxtamembrane
         actin fiber distribution. ICAM-2 gsv expression did not induce a juxtamembrane localization
         of actin fibers. Each transfectant was plated at ~60% confluence and maintained under
         standard conditions at 37oC to allow the cells to adhere to chamber slides. Approximately 18 hours after plating,
         cells were fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde and incubated with FITC-conjugated phalloidin.
         Actin fibers were then visualized using confocal fluorescence microscopy by standard
         methods. Inset photomicrographs were acquired at 20x magnification and using a Zeiss
         Axio Observer Z.1 microscope platform in conjunction with Zen 2011 Blue imaging software
         (Carl Zeiss) (Photomicrographs of control cell lines (neo and WT) were published previously
         [13]). B) The distribution of actin fibers in cells at the leading edge of migration in scratch
         (wound healing) assays was similar to actin fiber distribution in stationary sub-confluent
         cultures of each cell line. Scratch assays were performed as described for experiments
         depicted in Figure&nbsp;4. At 72 hours “post scratch”, cells were fixed and actin fibers visualized using FITC-phalloidin
         staining as described above, and fluorescence photomicrographs acquired using Nikon
         TE2000-U microscope with X-cite 120 mercury vapor short arc in conjunction with Q-capture
         ProV 5.1.1.14 software (Nikon Instruments, Inc.). Care was taken to acquire images
         of the control neo transfectants in areas where residual gaps from the original scratch
         were still visible, to confirm acquisition of the leading edge of migration.
      
      Figure 6. WT and gsv ICAM-2 suppressed anchorage-independent growth in vitro. All four glycosylation site ICAM-2 variants suppressed anchorage-independent growth.
         Soft agar assays were performed using standard methods. Number of colonies of &gt;20
         cells were visualized 14-21 days after plating and results analyzed using a 2-tailed
         t test and GraphPad Prism software. P = 0.0124*. P &lt; 0.0001***. Not shown in this
         Figure are control experiments demonstrating that the growth in soft agar of parental
         SK-N-AS cells was equivalent to control SK-N-ASpIRESneo transfectants.
      
      Figure 7. ICAM-2 WT and variants co-precipitated with α-actinin. A) IP/IB experiments with control cell lines demonstrate the expected association of
         ICAM-2, α-actinin and actin in lysates from SK-N-ASpIRES.ICAM-2 cells (labeled as
         WT), but not SK-N-ASpIRESneo cells (neo). Results for these control cell lines were
         published previously [13]. B) ICAM-2 glycosylation site variants associated simultaneously with α-actinin and
         actin. Immunoprecipitations (IP) were performed using whole cell lysates and a mouse
         monoclonal antibody to α-actinin (MAB1682, Millipore). Following protein separation
         by electrophoresis, immunoblots (IB) were performed with antibodies to α-actinin (sc-7454,
         Santa Cruz Biotech), ICAM-2 (AF244, R&amp;D Systems), or actin (4968, Cell Signaling).
         The presence of ICAM-2 WT and variants in each preparation was confirmed by immunoblot
         analysis of input preparations (a representative blot is shown in Figure&nbsp;2C) and also by immunoblot analysis of the proteins remaining in the supernatant following
         precipitation (not shown), to confirm the presence of sufficient/excess ICAM-2 protein
         or variant in each preparation used for immunoprecipitation experiments.
      
      Figure 8. ICAM-2 variants significantly delayed but did not completely inhibit development of
            disseminated tumors in an in vivo model of metastatic neuroblastoma. Mice received intravenous injections of SK-N-AS cells expressing no detectable ICAM-2
         (neo, N = 10), ICAM-2 WT (N = 10), or one of four hypo-glycosylated forms of ICAM-2
         (N = 5/group). Kaplan-Meier survival plots were analyzed by log-rank (Mantel-Cox)
         test using GraphPad Prism 5 software (Version 5.02). Mice receiving cells expressing
         hypo-glycosylated ICAM-2 survived longer than mice receiving cells expressing no detectable
         ICAM-2, but not as long as mice receiving cells expressing ICAM-2 WT.
      
      Cell proliferation assays (cell doubling time)
      To determine if the growth rates of all SK-N-AS transfectants expressing ICAM-2 variants
         were comparable, 1×106 cells were plated in 75 cm2 flasks, and cell numbers determined daily thereafter, using a hemocytometer. Doubling
         times were calculated using http://www.doubling-time.com/compute.php webcite[27].
      
      Anchorage-independent growth
      Each well of a 6-well plate was plated with 1mL 0.8% Sea-plaque agarose in DMEM with
         10% FBS, and cooled to 4°C overnight. NB cells were resuspended in soft agar (0.4%)
         in DMEM with 10% FBS at a density of 30,000 cells in 10 mL, and 1 mL of cell suspension
         was overlaid in the wells containing 0.8% agar. Plates were then incubated at 37°C
         for 14-21 days. Colonies of &gt;20 cells were identified microscopically and the number
         of colonies/well recorded. Six replicate wells of each transfectant were included
         in at least three independent experiments, as published previously [13,28].
      
      Scratch assays (wound healing assays)
      To assess the motility of transfectants expressing ICAM-2 variants, we performed scratch
         or wound healing assays [29]. Cells were plated at an initial density of 1×106 cells per well in 6-well plates and allowed to grow to confluency. A centerline was
         marked on the underside of each well along its horizontal axis, to designate loci
         at which images would be acquired at each time point. Vertical linear defects (scratches)
         were introduced into cell monolayers using a 200 μL pipet tip. Each well received
         3 scratches. Images were acquired at 0, 24, 48, and 72 hours post scratch, at 100×
         magnification at each intersection of the scratch wound (vertical defect) and the
         marked horizontal centerline using a Dr-5 digital camera (Southern Microscope) mounted
         t22232o a Nikon Eclipse TS100 inverted microscope. For each time point, 5 measurements
         were taken per well in each of 3 wells and the average the horizontal width of the
         linear defect in pixels calculated using Adobe Photoshop CS4 (version 11.0.2).
      
      Biotinylation of surface proteins
      Cells (SK-N-AS cells transfected to express ICAM-2 WT or variants gsv1,4,5; gsv1,2,5;
         gsv4,5; or gsv1-6) were plated in 175 cm2 tissue culture flasks (Corning) with standard growth medium (high glucose DMEM +
         10%FBS + 2 mM L-glutamine) and grown to near-confluence. Cells were washed 3 times
         with ice-cold PBS (pH 8.0) and surface proteins biotinylated for 30 minutes at room
         temperature using 0.5 mg/ml EZ-Link® Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin (21335; Thermo Scientific/Pierce)
         reconstituted in PBS (pH 8.0). The biotinlyation reaction was quenched by washing
         the cells 3 times with 100 mM glycine in PBS (pH 7.2). Cells were then lysed with
         0.5% NP-40 + complete Mini protease inhibitor (Roche) and homogenized. Biotinylated
         protein preparations were then incubated with 100 μl Pierce streptavidin® resin (6%
         crosslinked beaded agarose 50% aqueous slurry) at room temperature for 20 minutes
         with gentle rocking, and then centrifuged to separate membrane-associated, biotin-avidin
         precipitated proteins from unlabeled proteins. After unbound proteins (supernatant)
         were removed, beads were washed 3 times with cold lysis buffer, boiled in sample buffer,
         and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Following electrophoresis, standard immunoblots were performed.
      
      Glycosidase digestion
      Cleavage of N-linked glycans was carried out using Endo H (#P0702L; New England BioLabs,
         Ipswich, MA) and PNGase F (#P0704S; New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA) according to
         the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, 20 μg of protein from control cells (HBMEC-28)
         or NB cells expressing ICAM-2 WT or a variant were denatured at 100°C for 10 minutes
         with glycoprotein denaturing buffer (5% SDS, 0.4M DTT in PBS). After cooling, protein
         solutions were centrifuged and incubated for an additional hour at 37°C with 2 μl
         of either Endo H enzyme (plus G5 Reaction buffer, pH 5.5; New England Biolabs) or
         PNGase F enzyme (plus G7 reaction buffer, pH 7.5 plus 10% NP-40 ; New England Biolabs).
         Control samples were subjected to the same denaturing and digesting conditions, but
         substituting equivalent volumes of water for enzyme. Samples were then subjected to
         SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analyses.
      
      Immunoprecipitations and immunoblots
      Co-immunoprecipitations (IP) were done as described previously [13]. The antibody used for IP of α-actinin was MAB1682 (Millipore, Fisher Scientific,
         Savannah, GA). Antibodies used for immunoblots (IB) for ICAM-2, α-actinin, and actin
         were AF244 (R&amp;D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) and sc-1512 (Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz,
         CA), 4968 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), and A5316 (Sigma-Aldrich, St.
         Louis, MO), respectively. AF244 is a goat polyclonal IgG that recognizes the extracellular
         domain of ICAM-2. C-20 is a goat polyclonal IgG that recognizes the intracellular
         C-terminus of the ICAM-2 protein. Secondary HRP-conjugated anti-goat (AF244, sc-1512),
         anti-rabbit (4968) and anti-mouse (A5316) antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz
         Biotech. The ECL system (Pierce ECL Chemiluminescent Substrate; Thermo Scientific)
         was used to detect presence of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) enzyme. Immunoblot result
         in Figure&nbsp;2D was quantitated using Adobe Photoshop CS4 (San Jose, CA) by multiplying area by
         integrated intensity of the band of interest and normalizing that result to that of
         a control protein (actin) band.
      
      Subcellular localization of F-actin
      Actin fibers were visualized by fluorescence microscopy using standard methods [30]. Briefly, cells were plated in chamber well slides (2 × 105 cells per chamber) and allowed to adhere. Approximately 18 hours after plating, cells
         were washed with PBS and fixed with 3.7% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 minutes
         at room temperature. Remaining attached cells were washed with PBS, and permeabilized
         with 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100 for 1 minute. Actin fibers were stained with 10 μg fluorescein
         isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated phalloidin (P5282; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO)
         in 1 mL phosphate buffered saline (PBS) for 30 minutes. Phalloidin-stained fibers
         were visualized by confocal fluorescence microscope equipped with narrow band filters,
         by standard methods (Figure&nbsp;5A) or by the Zeiss Axio Observer Z.1 microscope platform in conjunction with Zen 2011
         Blue imaging software (Carl Zeiss)(insets in Figure&nbsp;5A). DAPI (4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; appears as blue fluorescence) was used to
         detect DNA.
      
      Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
      Flow cytometric analyses were used to verify the cell membrane localization of ICAM-2
         and ICAM-2 variants. Cells (1 × 106) were trypsinized, washed twice with PBS, and incubated for 30 min with goat serum
         (G9023, Sigma-Aldrich) diluted 1:10 in PBS. Cells were then incubated for 60 minutes
         on ice with mouse monoclonal anti-human ICAM-2 antibody (CBR-IC2/2, sc-23935 PE; Santa
         Cruz Biotech). A separate aliquot of cells was incubated with mouse isotope-matched
         IgG (sc-2025, Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, CA) as a negative control. All samples
         were then washed twice with FACS buffer (1% BSA in PBS) and incubated for 60 minutes
         on ice with phycoerythrin (PE, sc-3798, Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, CA)-conjugated
         goat anti-mouse IgG. Data were acquired on an LSR-II cytometer (BD Biosciences, San
         Jose, CA) and analyzed using FlowJo v 7.6.1 (TreeStar) software. Only intact cells,
         as identified by forward and side light scatter, were analyzed. Propidium iodide (5
         μg/mL PBS; stored at 4°C in the dark) staining was also used as a parameter to exclude
         non-viable cells.
      
      Morphology
      Transfected cells were seeded at a density of 15,000 cells/cm2 and maintained under standard culture conditions for 24-48 hours. Photomicrographs
         were acquired at 20× magnification using a Dr-5 digital camera (Southern Microscope)
         mounted to a Nikon Eclipse TS100 inverted microscope and archived with TSView software
         (version 7.1.04, Tucsen Imaging Technology Co./Southern Microscope, Inc., Haw River,
         NC).
      
      Membrane fractionation
      Cells were washed three times with PBS at 4°C, and resuspended in Cell Lysis Buffer
         (10 mM HEPES, 10 mM NaCl, 1 mM KH2PO4, 5 mM NaHCO3, 1 mM CaCl2, and 0.5 mM MgCl2 solution ) + 1 mM EDTA + protease inhibitor (complete mini protease inhibitor tablets;
         Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) solution. Cells were allowed to swell for
         5 minutes on ice and then homogenized using a Fisher Scientific Misonix XL2000 Ultrasonic
         Homogenizer (Fisher Scientific), and centrifuged at 7,500 rpm for 5 minutes. The resulting
         supernatant suspension contained both plasma membrane and cytosolic proteins. This
         suspension was then re-centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 30 minutes to separate the plasma
         membrane (pellet) from the soluble protein fraction. The crude plasma membrane pellet
         was then resuspended in 40 μl PBS and standard assays done to determine the protein
         concentration of these suspensions. Samples were stored at -80°C until ready for use.
         Suspensions were verified as membrane-enriched by immunoblot analysis for the plasma
         membrane marker (ATP1A1; Novus, Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO) [31].
      
      Mouse model of metastatic neuroblastoma
      Female Es1e/SCID mice (6-8 weeks old) were obtained from St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital
         Animal Resources Center (ARC) (Memphis, TN), with the approval of Dr. Phil Potter
         [32]. The in vivo animal studies were carried out in accordance with a protocol approved by the St.
         Jude Children’s Research Hospital Animal Care and Use Committee (Approval Number:
         374). All mice were maintained in the Animal Resources Center at St. Jude and monitored
         daily for tumor growth. Mice were euthanized as soon as any animal that appeared to
         be in distress or discomfort. Animals were housed in an AAALAC accredited vivarium
         at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital Animal Resources Center under the direction
         of Dr. Richard Rahija. Bedding and chow were autoclaved and cages changed twice weekly.
      
      When injected intravenously into the tail veins of Es1e/SCID mice, SK-N-AS NB cells (5 × 105 cells) produce disseminated tumors in 100% of mice. The number of cells administered
         was not toxic to Es1e/SCID mice and no discomfort or death was seen at the time of injection. In this model,
         there is no “primary tumor” but the pattern of tumor development recapitulates the
         clinical dissemination of high-risk NB; tumors develop in multiple anatomic locations
         including lung, liver and bone marrow [33,34]. Groups of 10 (neo and WT transfectants) or 5 mice (gsv1,4,5; gsv1,2,5; gsv4,5; gsv1-6
         transfectants) were followed for 300 days after intravenous injection of tumor cells.
         Any animal that appeared to be in distress was euthanized and the day of euthanasia
         was recorded as the day of death.
      
      Statistical analyses
      Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software, version 5.02 (GraphPad,
         San Diego, CA); graphs were generated using the same software. Two-tailed t tests
         were used to analyze results of soft agar assays and two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni
         post tests was used to analyze scratch assays. Soft agar assays and scratch (wound
         healing) assays were repeated a minimum of three times, with each experiment including
         six replicates of each cell line. Kaplan Meier survival data were used to calculate
         the 95% confidence interval for time-dependent fractional survival, using a log-rank
         (Mantel-Haenszel) test to compare survival of mice receiving vector control cells
         (neo), ICAM-2 WT, or gsv transfected cells.
      
   

