Methods
   
      We compared the postnatal weight gain of preterm infants in three North American cities
         to a fetal-infant growth reference (FIGR), which was generated based on a systematic
         review of the literature before 40&nbsp;weeks 
         				[19] and the World Health Organization Growth Standard (WHOGS) after 40&nbsp;weeks 
         				[20] of gestation. The FIGR fetal weight values were a weighted average of fetal growth
         from six population-based surveys with a minimum required sample size &gt; 25,000 infants
         from developed countries (Germany, Italy, USA, Canada, Australia, and Scotland) over
         the past 25&nbsp;years 
         				[4-8,21].
      
      The preterm infant multicentre growth study (PreMGS)
      Growth, medical, nutrition, and descriptive data of preterm infants were collected
         in three cities: Calgary and Regina in Canada, and San Diego in USA from a retrospective
         chart review. Neonatal intensive care was provided by Alberta Health Services in Calgary,
         Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region (RQHR) in Regina, and the NICU at the University of
         California San Diego (UCSD) Medical Center in San Diego, USA. These neonatal units
         have provided early nutrition support since 2005. Parenteral nutrition started on
         the birth day or day one of life for most of these infants. Post-discharge, the infants
         were cared for in the Neonatal Transition Program and the Southern Alberta Perinatal
         Clinic in Calgary, the Neonatal Intensive Care Follow-up Program in Regina, and the
         Premature Infant Nutrition Community (PINC) Clinic in San Diego. The PreMGS was granted
         ethical approval by the Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board, University of Calgary
         and RQHR Research Ethics Board Regina, and UCSD Human Research Protections Program.
      
      Subjects
      The preterm infants were included if they were born between 2001 and 2010, and their
         gestational age was less than 32&nbsp;weeks. Infants were excluded if they had congenital
         anomalies or did not survive until discharge, as these conditions could affect growth.
         The data were collected prospectively during clinical care in Level III NICUs, associated
         Level II units and in routine post-discharge care, and extracted from the charts by
         trained research assistants.
      
      Clinical data
      Neonatal information included: gender, gestational age (weeks), medical history of
         necrotizing enterocolitis, oxygen therapy, SNAP II scores, and anthropometric measurements:
         a) size at birth (weight (kg), head circumference (cm), and recumbent length (cm)),
         b) daily weights for the first 21&nbsp;days, c) weekly size measures (weight, head circumference,
         and length) while in the hospital, d) all available size measures post discharge up
         to and including 4&nbsp;months corrected age. Gestational age was defined by maternal dates
         and/or ultrasound. If maternal dates differed by more than 2&nbsp;weeks from assessed age,
         and if early ultrasound data was not available, then assessed age was used. Appropriateness
         of size for gestational age was assigned based on the FIGR.
      
      Nutrition data
      Data on nutrition support included: age at initiation of parenteral and enteral nutrition
         (minimal enteral feedings (less than or equal to 20&nbsp;mL/kg/day) as well as enteral
         feedings (greater than 20&nbsp;mL/kg/day), full enteral feedings (defined as greater than
         140&nbsp;mL/kg/day), weekly recordings of types of feeding in hospital and post discharge
         (breast milk or formula), use of human milk fortifier (powder or preterm formula as
         a fortifier), total fluid intakes, and number of feeding interruptions (defined as
         being stop of enteral/oral feeds with advancement of feeds that took 4 + days to achieve
         greater than140 mL/kg).
      
      Data management
      The preterm infants were grouped into three cohorts according to their gestational
         age at birth: 23 to 25, 26 to 28, and 29 to 31&nbsp;weeks. As not all infants were measured
         each week after discharge, values were interpolated between measurements. The individual
         and median weight gain trajectories of the preterm infants were plotted together with
         the FIGR.
      
      The cohorts’ weights at various ages were compared to the FIGR using z-scores. Specifically
         we determined the proportion of growth restriction (defined as weight less than the
         10th percentile) separated either as intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) at birth
         or extrauterine growth restriction (EUGR) any time postnatally. Comparisons were made
         against the FIGR (for data up to 40&nbsp;weeks) and the WHOGS (for data 40 to 50&nbsp;weeks).
      
      Weight gain velocity was calculated (in g/kg/day) along the median weight curves,
         for the preterm infant cohorts and the FIGR using the follow calculation 
         					[22]:
      
      
         
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 end weight - start weight in grams
                              
                              
                                 _
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 average weight in kilograms
                              
                              
                                 _
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           number of days
                        
                     
                  
               
         
      
      The smoothed weight gain velocity of the three preterm infant cohorts, together with
         the median FIGR weight gain velocity, were plotted against gestational age, and weight
         gain during the intervals were reported. Differences between median FIGR weight velocity
         and the preterm infants’ weight gain (g/kg/day) were calculated by subtracting the
         fetal-infant rates from the preterm rates.
      
      The mean weight gain for the three groups of preterm infants in this study were compared
         to the mean growth of the infants from the National Institute of Child Health and
         Human Development Neonatal Research Network (NICHD) 
         					[10] (born between 1994 and 1995), along with the FIGR-WHOGS 3rd, 50th and 97th percentiles.
         To obtain an NICHD cohort similar to our 23–25&nbsp;week cohort (mean birthweight 664 grams)
         we combined the 550 and 750 gram NICHD cohorts using a weighted average and pooled
         standard deviations.
      
      Statistical analysis
      Comparisons of the prevalence of growth restriction at various time points were made
         using two-sample tests of proportions. t-tests were used to compare mean preterm weight
         gain velocity rates with the mean of the FIGR estimates. Results with p-values &lt; 0.05
         were considered to be statistically significant.
      
   

