Methods
   
      The QCPR3535 monitor was used to measure and record each performer’s heart compression
         depth, frequency, released pressure between compressions and the time of compression
         and ventilation, which was supervised by pressure distance sensor placed on chest
         under the hands, and the hand skill, position and posture were recorded. The measured
         data were evaluated by 2 persons, one of whom recorded them into the table and fed
         them into the computer, and the other checked to make sure the data were accurate
         and reliable.
      
      Testing instruments
      The QCPR3535 monitor with a pressure distance sensor which could be placed on the
         sternum was provided by Philips Company. The sensor could gather the data, and deliver
         them to HeartStart MRx to be explained. The wave table could be used to show compression
         frequency and depth. The height of waves showed the compression depth, and the time
         interval between waves showed the frequency and the data above waves were the calculated
         number of compression per minute. The equipment could make real-time analysis of the
         compression, and compare the practical performance with that of the AHA Guideline
         2010. If the compression depth or frequency exceeded the target, MRX would show signals
         on the screen and provide feedback sound. The compression depth was tested by compression
         depth waves on the monitor, and if the depth exceeded the line, it was proper. If
         the depth couldn’t reach the line, it was too low; the proper compression frequency
         was no less than 100 times per minute. The released pressure between compressions
         could be shown with special signals on the screen, and it could be shown by the “*”s
         on the monitor screen. If there was “*”on the screen, that meant no pressure was released;
         if there was no “*”on the screen, that meant pressure was released. The same Annier
         CPR simulated dummies were used in the test.
      
      Statistical processing
      The SPSS15.0 software system was used in data processing. The measured materials were
         expressed with x- ± s, and analyzed by t Test; the calculated materials were tested
         by χ2, and the influence factors were analyzed by multi-factor Logistic repression
         method, and P&lt;0.05 referred to the distinct difference in statistics.
      
   

