Methods
   
      Survey areas
      The survey was conducted in portions of six different malaria endemic districts in
         Bangladesh from July to October 2011. The survey consisted of interviews using a structured
         questionnaire and the interviewer also completed an observational checklist for each
         household. Households were randomly selected and sample sizes of each district were
         fixed on the basis of the population of the areas and the anticipated regional prevalence
         of malaria. The study area was divided in two zones (1 and 2) on the basis of prevalence
         of malaria and the physical geography of the study area. Zone 1 (4 districts) is the
         hilly and highly malaria endemic zone while Zone 2 (2 districts) is the lowlands or
         plains habitat with low malaria endemicity. Zone 1 includes Lama upazilla (sub-district)
         of Bandarban, Ramu of Cox’s Bazar, Rajhsthali of Rangamati, and Srimangal of Moulvibazar
         districts. Zone 2 consisted of Durgapur of Netrokona and Dhobaura of Mymensingh districts
         (Figure 1 and Table 1). The villages of Lama (Figure 2) and Ramu were inhabited by 1,206 and 1,386 people, respectively comprising both
         tribal and non-tribal families (Figure 3). Major parts of Lama and Ramu were vegetated by secondary forest with interspersed
         rubber plantations. The study area of Rajasthali had both a tribal and non-tribal
         population consisting of 997 people (50.3% male), living within 122 households. The
         survey was made in Lawachara, Magurchara, Husnabad tea estates (Figure 4) and BTRI (Figure 5) in Moulvibazar district. Almost all the laborers of these tea estates were brought
         from Orissa state of India during British rule. These sites consist of tea gardens,
         semi-evergreen coniferous forests and mixed deciduous forests [11]. Survey was also conducted in Durgapur of Netrokona and in Dhobaura of Mymenshing
         district where some tribal people also live. Both of these districts were within similar
         climatic zones with foothills, plains and undulating land and densely vegetated by
         secondary forest. Geographical positions of the surveyed households were recorded
         using handheld global positioning system (GPS-Garmin Oregon 550). ArcView GIS 3.3
         and Arc GIS 9.2 software were used to map the distribution of the households where
         interviews were conducted. 
      
      Table 1. Number of respondents and malaria cases in different malaria endemic region of Bangladesh
      Figure 2. Pattern of the houses in Lama, Bandarban.
      Figure 3. Interviews with a tribal family in Bandarban.
      Figure 4. Respondent houses with domestic animal in Srimangal.
      Figure 5. Household interviews in BTRI.
      Sample size
      In this survey, a total of 468 individuals from individual households were interviewed.
         The largest number of respondents (n=364) were interviewed from four malaria prone
         districts (zone 1). The remainder of the respondents interviewed lived within the
         two low malaria endemic districts bordering Meghalaya state of India (Table 1). Sample size of zone 2 was small because of low prevalence of malaria.
      
      Ethical approval
      Ethics approval and authorization was obtained from the ethical committee of Jahangirnagar
         University, Bangladesh. Before data collection, each participant was clearly informed
         about the objectives of the study and verbal permission from the head of each household
         was obtained. Verbal consent was also obatin from the villagers' to capture and publish
         the interview photographs.
      
      Data collection
      Households and members to be interviewed were randomly selected. The interviewers
         recorded the address of the interview and type of construction of the house then selected
         the person to be interviewed. After obtaining verbal consent, questions were asked
         related to: socio-demographic features of the household members, knowledge and practices
         regarding malaria prevention and control, treatment-seeking behavior and use of antimalarial
         drugs. Selected observations related to household construction were also collected
         using the observational checklist. In order to minimize potential biases and to improve
         participant understanding the questionnaire was prepared in English but translated
         and provided in the local language ‘Bangla’.
      
      Data analysis
      Data analysis was done using Statistical Package for Social Sciences 16.0 (SPSS, Inc.,
         Chicago, IL, USA). Each question was analyzed individually. Statistical relationships
         were sought between malaria prevalence and selected socio-demographic conditions and
         practices of the respondents and statistical analysis was conducted only with those
         families who had malaria within the last year. Results were recorded as frequencies,
         chi-square and p-values. For all purposes, p-value of 0.05 was considered as the level of significance.
      
   

