Methods
   
      A cross sectional study was conducted between August 2011 and February 2012. The Palestinian
         territories, where the study took place, comprise the West Bank, Gaza Strip and East
         Jerusalem. This study was carried out at the 4 governmental primary psychiatric healthcare
         centers located in Nablus, Tulkaram, Jenin and Qalqilia in northern West-Bank, Palestine.
      
      The centers included in the study were those in Nablus, Jenin, Tulkaram, and Qalqilia.
         Patients who fulfilled the following criteria were invited to participate: 1) their
         age was above 16 years old, 2) they were diagnosed with schizophrenia as defined by
         Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), 3) they had not been
         suffering from an acute attack of psychiatric illness during the past year, and 4)
         their drug regimen had not been changed in the past 6 months as evident from their
         medical files. Patients who had the following characteristics were excluded from the
         study: 1) newly diagnosed patients and 2) patients who were not on any antipsychotic
         medication.
      
      A convenience, non-probability sampling method was used. To collect the sample, the
         researchers visited and stayed 4 weeks in each center and collected data from patients
         who met the inclusion criteria. In order to estimate with sufficient precision the
         prescribing pattern, particularly, antipsychotic combination, we hypothesized a worst-case
         scenario level of antipsychotic combination of about 70%, to be estimated with a 95%
         confidence interval of 15 percentage points. Therefore, we needed a sample size of
         at least 134 patients. The final sample collected during the study period was 250
         clients. We developed data collection forms to cover all data items needed. The form
         covered the following areas: socio-demographic variables, psychiatric history, antipsychotic
         medication currently being used, and history of psychiatric hospitalization. Before
         commencing the study, the data collection form was modified by the researchers and
         the modified version was reviewed by experts to ensure content and construct validity.
         Data from the pre-test evaluation were not included in the final analysis. Focus group
         discussions were continuously held between research team to identify any problems
         in data collection or interpretation of definitions or application of study criteria.
      
      Approval to perform the study was obtained from the Palestinian ministry of health,
         the college of Graduate Studies at An-Najah national University and the Institutional
         Review Boards (IRB) committee at An-Najah National University. Written consent was
         obtained from all participants.
      
      Tested variables
      Chlorpromazine dose equivalencies (CPZeq)
      The CPZeq is a measure of the relative antipsychotic potencies of neuroleptics. They
         are generally expressed as a ratio, relative to the arbitrary value of 1, which corresponds
         to the antipsychotic effects of chlorpromazine. The daily dose of antipsychotic medication
         prescribed to each patient was converted to milligram equivalents of chlorpromazine
         according to conversion factors derived from the literature [11,12]. Total CPZeq was constructed by calculating a total daily dose of each antipsychotic
         listed in the medical file. Then each converted antipsychotic-specific CPZeq amount
         is added to arrive at a total dose. A maintenance dose of total CPZeq in the range
         of 300 – 600 mg is considered optimum.
      
      Antipsychotic combination
      The operational definition of antipsychotic combination is the use of two or more
         antipsychotic drugs while that of monotherapy is the use of one antipsychotic drug.
         In this study, since no changes were made in the therapeutic regimen of all clients,
         then no clients were in the transitional period of changing or switching from one
         antipsychotic to another. Therefore, clients who were on combination therapy were
         actually on 2 or more medications and were not in a transitional phase of discontinuation
         of one drug and an initiation of another drug.
      
      Positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS)
      The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) which was published in 1987 [13,14] is widely used in the study of antipsychotic therapy. The PANSS consists of three
         sections: positive symptoms (7 items); negative symptoms (7 items); and general psychopathology
         (14 items). Each item has a score from 1 – 7 with the highest scores representing
         the highest severity. For each section, the total score was calculated by summing
         the scores for all items in that section. The interview with the clients to assess
         PANSS was carried out by the author. The author (mental health specialist) was trained
         on PANSS before the start of the study. Each interview took 30 – 35 minutes.
      
      Conformance indicators
      In order to construct the indicators of conformance, we reviewed several updated guidelines
         regarding recommendations for maintenance pharmacological treatment of schizophrenia
         [9,10]. We identified two major recommendations that could be evaluated using a cross-sectional
         medical chart review, and for which the required information was available in the
         medical records.
      
      I. The first conformance indicator recommends that monotherapy is the preferred and
         evidence based choice while combination therapy lacks evidence and support. Our cross
         sectional methodology could not be used to provide information on whether patients
         were undergoing a trial of second alternative antipsychotic drug (switching) or not.
         However, we assumed that all patients were not undergoing switching because their
         medications have been constant since more than six months. Therefore, we drafted a
         conformance indicator that examined whether patients were receiving one or combination.
      
      II. The second conformance indicator recommends that the maintenance dosage of antipsychotic
         medication be in the range of 300 – 600 mg CPZeq per day. Since all patients in the
         study sample had been ill for a long time and their medications had not been changed
         since the past six months, we assumed that most patients were on maintenance doses
         and created a conformance indicator that assessed whether the antipsychotic dosages
         prescribed for patients were between 300–600 mg CPZeq/day.
      
      Cost of antipsychotic regimen
      The total annual cost for antipsychotic treatment for each patient was calculated
         in United State Dollar (1 USD = 3.7 New Israeli Shekel (NIS) at the time of the study).
         The cost of each antipsychotic drug per dose per unit was obtained from the Ministry
         of Health (personal communication).
      
      Data analysis
      Descriptive statistics for all study variables were computed. These descriptive statistics
         included frequencies and percentages for all categorical variables in addition to
         means, standard deviations and ranges for all normally distributed continuous variables
         while median and inter quartile range (Q1-Q3) for continuous variables that were not
         normally distributed. Variables were tested for normality using the Kolmogorov– Smirnov
         test. Non-parametric binomial t-test was used to test the difference in the prevalence of antipsychotic combination
         obtained in this study with those published elsewhere. Statistical significance for
         intergroup differences was assessed by the Student’s t-test for continuous variables. Univariate analysis and multiple logistic regression
         was used to find significant factors associated with antipsychotic combination.
      
      All statistical analyses were conducted using Statistical Package for Social Sciences
         SPSS (PASW version 18.0; IBM, Somers, NY) statistical packages for Windows. The conventional
         5 percent significance level was used throughout the study.
      
   

