Methods
   
      During the 2011–12 academic year there were 33 Colombian dental schools, operating
         in 18 Universities and 4 geographic regions, with a total of 13,944 enrolled students.
         In Colombia the majority students enroll in dental school right after high school
         and admissions are based primarily upon competitive national exams and school-conducted
         interviews. Most schools are private and have tuition rates that vary, but are generally
         considered high. Dental studies are structured around a traditional, mostly lecture-based
         5-year curriculum. The first two years are focused on didactic activities on biomedical
         and dental introductory courses. During the 2nd but mainly the 3rd year students undergo laboratory and pre-clinical training. Years 4 and 5 entail
         clinical training. Empirical observations indicate that only a small proportion of
         dental students complete their studies within the 10 semesters of the regular curriculum;
         most require 1–3 extra semesters to graduate, whereas considerable proportions drop
         out.
      
      The investigators initially contacted 22 schools from 13 Universities to participate
         in the study, and 17 (77%) schools agreed to do so. Although the resulting sampling
         frame of 8530 students does not constitute a probability sample of Colombian dental
         students, it represents 61% of the country’s entire dental student population.
      
      After obtaining ethical approval, investigators contacted and sought to enroll all
         students officially registered and attending classes or clinics in each school between
         January and April 2012. Of 8530 eligible individuals 5700 agreed to participate, an
         overall response rate of 67%. Response rates varied and ranged from approximately
         40% in UNAL - Bogotá and 42% in UAM - Manizales to 100% in UCC - Pasto, CURN - Cartagena
         and UMET -Barranquilla (Table&nbsp;1). These differences were not strongly influenced by school characteristics. Nevertheless,
         we noted a statistically non-significant trend of lower response rate with increasing
         class (and school) size: “small schools”: 78%, “moderate size schools”: 75%, “large
         schools”: 67%; P = 0.5”.
      
      Table 1. Description of the study sample frame and response rates, by geographical area, city
            and school
      Study instruments and procedures
      The survey instrument contained an array of five questionnaires that covered the following
         domains: socio-demography (6 items), first career choice (1 item), school and study-level
         information (6 items), psychological distress [Spanish version of the Symptoms Checklist
         90-Revised (SCL-90-R) [23] – 90 items], perceived sources of stress (Spanish version of the modified Dental
         Environment Stress (DES) questionnaire [24,25] - 36 items), self-efficacy (Spanish version of the General Self-Efficacy Scale [26] – 10 items) and burnout (Spanish adaptation of the Maslach Burnout Inventory-Student
         Survey [27] – 15 items). The present manuscript contains results of analyses that were focused
         on symptoms of psychological distress (SCL-90-R); another report [28] presents findings regarding the perceived academic stressors (DES) among this sample
         of students.
      
      Students were approached during scheduled class or seminar times. Investigators explained
         the purpose, anonymous nature and voluntary character of the study. The survey was
         administered in paper and pencil form which required approximately 25&nbsp;minutes for
         completion.
      
      Measures and variables
      The main analytical endpoint (dependent variable) of the present report was psychological
         distress, as measured by the SCL-90-R. The SCL-90-R was introduced by Derogatis [29], and represents an evolution of earlier instruments measuring mental health, the
         SCL-90 [30] and the Hopkins Symptom Checklist [31]. The SCL-90-R is essentially a psychiatric self-report inventory, containing 90 items
         pertaining to various symptoms of psychological distress, such as “trouble remembering
         things” and “feeling nervous when you are left alone”. Participants were instructed
         to indicate how much distress each item has caused during the “last 7&nbsp;days including
         today” on a 5-point scale ranging from 0: not at all to 4: extremely.
      
      The instrument has been used among diverse populations, and was shown to perform well
         in terms of reliability and internal consistency. The SCL-90-R was originally reported
         to be capturing nine symptom dimensions, namely somatization, obsessive-compulsive,
         interpersonal sensitivity, depression, anxiety, hostility, phobic anxiety, paranoid
         ideation, and psychoticism. However, this factorial structure was not subsequently
         confirmed [32]. Instead, the Global Severity Index (GSI), the mean score of all items, is considered
         to be the best representation of an overall psychological distress dimension. Other
         indices of distress that can be derived from the inventory are the Positive Symptom
         Distress Index (PSDI), representing the average score of items scoring above zero
         and the Positive Symptoms Total (PST), representing the number of items scoring above
         zero [29]. The PSDI can be interpreted as a symptoms “intensity” measure and the PST as a symptoms
         “extent” measure. For clinical and consultation purposes, normative scores and thresholds
         were initially suggested for adolescent and adult psychiatric patients and non-patients
         [23], however, classifications derived from these standard scores have been of limited
         utility across populations and settings [33,34]. In fact, because the structure and properties of the instrument tend to vary between
         populations, it has been recommended to empirically establish them in each new study
         sample [35]. Nevertheless, there is agreement regarding differences in reporting of psychological
         disturbance with the SCL-90-R between males and females, and therefore, as most previous
         investigations we obtained and reported sex-stratified estimates.
      
      We collected additional information regarding participants’ age [measured in years
         and coded as a categorical variable (under 18, 18- &lt; 21, 21- &lt; 24, and 24 and over)
         for descriptive and as a continuous variable for analytical purposes]; sex; study
         year (1–5); sources of funding for studies (own sources only, own sources and loans,
         loans only); working while studying (yes/no) and socio-economic level (1–6, where
         1 is the lowest and 6 is the highest socio-economic stratum in Colombia). We also
         obtained information about the students’ first career choice (dentistry vs. other).
         With regard to school-level variables, we recorded its private or public character
         and the average class size [coded arbitrarily as small (&lt;30), moderate (30–60) and
         large (&gt;60 students)].
      
      Analytical approach
      For initial data presentation and exploration we used descriptive statistics [simple
         proportions, means, standard deviations (SD), medians and ranges], overall and stratified by sex. We used X2 tests and a p &lt; 0.05 criterion to assess the distribution of covariates between male
         and female participants, and a t test for the ‘age’ variable. The use of a t test for non-normally distributed data was supported by the central limit theorem applied
         to a large sample [36].
      
      Factor analysis
      We explored the factor structure of SCL-90-R in the context of our study using iterated
         principal factor analysis with varimax rotation [37]. We empirically determined the factor structure by inspecting the corresponding Scree
         plot [38] and the proportion of ‘variance explained’. The inspection of the scree plot has
         been shown to perform better than Kaiser’s factor-retention criterion of eigenvalue ≥ 1,
         particularly in analyses with large number of items, where it consistently overestimates
         the number of factors to be retained [39]. Although we only used the GSI for analytical purposes, we generated and present
         internal consistencies (Cronbach’s alphas), mean scores, SD and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for all other SCL-90-R derived
         indices to offer an opportunity for comparisons with other samples and studies that
         employ these other metrics.
      
      Modeling of the psychological disturbance index (SCL-90-R)
      The sample’s clustered nature of observations (respondents were “nested” in dental
         schools and these “nested” within cities and geographic regions) dictated the use
         of analytical methods based on multilevel modeling [40]. To determine the impact of student- and school-level factors on psychological disturbance
         throughout the 5-year curriculum we used multilevel mixed-effects multivariate linear
         regression of the GSI. We accounted for the clustering of observations and study sample
         design by specifying three nested random-effect terms, one for each sample “level”,
         geographic region, University/city, and school, confirming their inclusion by a Likelihood
         Ratio (LR) “chunk” test [41] and a p-value criterion of &lt;0.2. In all models we entered a priori terms for age, sex, socio-economic status and study year. Inclusion of additional
         covariates was based on forward selection and LR tests with a p-value criterion of
         &lt;0.2. To allow for non-homogeneous effects of age, socio-economic status and first
         career choice between males and females and across study years, we included a five-way
         interaction term between these variables. We based our inference on crude and adjusted
         beta coefficients and corresponding p-values using a p &lt;0.05 criterion, as well as
         inspection of predictive marginal effects [42].
      
      Modeling of psychological morbidity “high scorers”
      To quantify the impact of student and school-level factors on the prevalence of high
         psychological morbidity we used a second series of multivariate models based on log-binomial
         regression. First, we generated normalized GSI (T) scores centered at 50 separately
         for males and females and, as in previous studies [29,43-45], used a T score ≥63 definition for a psychological morbidity “high scorer”. This
         cut-off score resulted in classifying 8% of students of both sexes as “high scorers”.
         Subsequently, we fitted two log-binomial regression models separately for male and
         female “high scorer” and obtained adjusted prevalence ratios (PR) and 95% CI. Our
         choice of log-binomial versus the more common logistic regression was based on the
         fact that odds ratios obtained from logistic regression tend to overestimate the true
         effect size when the outcome under study is common (&gt;20%) and because prevalence ratios
         are more readily interpretable compared to odds ratios in cross-sectional studies
         [46,47]. We used Stata version 12.1 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, United States) for
         all data analyses.
      
      Ethical approval
      The study was approved by the Health Sciences Ethics Committee of Universidad Cooperativa
         de Colombia- Pasto (No. CECS02-12).
      
   

