Methods
   
      Subjects
      Five hundred and eighteen Hong Kong Chinese postmenopausal women aged 50 to 64&nbsp;years
         were recruited for a study to examine the prevalence of subclinical atherosclerosis
         and its associated risk factors during 2002-2004. Subjects were recruited by random
         telephone dialing based on the most recent residential telephone directory. At least
         6 attempts were made at different times of the day and week for each number before
         it was considered a noncontact. If more than one postmenopausal woman within the household
         fell into the targeted age range of 50 to 64&nbsp;years, the member with the most recent
         birthday was selected. Women with surgical menopause, cardiovascular disease, and
         severe disease conditions such as cancer and renal failure were excluded. Eligible
         women were invited for questionnaire interviews, clinical examinations, and ultrasound
         measurements. A response rate of 62.5% was obtained. Details of the sampling method
         and of the baseline cohort have been reported elsewhere [36].
      
      Between 2008 and 2009, the cohort was invited to re-attend for repeat questionnaire
         interviews, clinical examinations, and ultrasound measurements. The procedure for
         data collection was the same as baseline and follow-up. 414 of the 518 subjects (79.9%)
         returned. Of these individuals, those who were ambulant without assistance from another
         person were subsequently invited for the VO2max assessment. Those who reported that they had leg pain, pace maker implanted, or were
         taking blood thinning medications were excluded. In addition, subjects who had systolic
         blood pressure &gt; 199&nbsp;mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure &gt; 109&nbsp;mm Hg, heart rate &lt; 40
         or &gt; 110 beats per minute, had evidence of abnormal resting or exercise electrocardiogram,
         or had severe disease conditions such as heart disease, cancer, or renal failure were
         excluded. Hence, the present study population consisted of 184 subjects who had participated
         in the follow-up examinations with completed data on blood pressures, anthropometric
         and metabolic profiles, VO2max, and other confounding factors. Written informed consent was obtained from each subject
         and the study was approved by the Ethics Committees of the Chinese University of Hong
         Kong.
      
      Clinical examinations
      Subjects fasted for 12&nbsp;h before attending the study centre. Venous samples of blood
         were collected for the measurement of total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, low-density
         lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, triglycerides, and fasting blood glucose. Blood samples
         were analyzed using commercial kits (Randox, United Kingdom) with standard enzymatic
         methods on the Alcyon 300 analyzer (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL). Blood pressures
         were measured twice with a mercury sphygmomanometer on the right upper arm with the
         subject seated quietly for at least 10&nbsp;minutes. Height, weight, waist, and hip circumferences
         were also measured twice with the subject wearing light clothing and no shoes. BMI
         was documented. Waist circumference was measured over the abdomen at the smallest
         diameter between the costal margin and iliac crest and hip circumference was measured
         at the level of the greater trochanters. Waist-to-hip ratio was calculated as the
         ratio of waist-to-hip circumferences.
      
      According to the NCEP ATP III guidelines [1] and the revised cut-off value of waist circumference for defining abdominal obesity
         for Asian populations [37], a subject was classified as having MS if she had three or more of the following
         risk factors: 1) high blood pressure (systolic blood pressure ≥ 130&nbsp;mm Hg and/or diastolic
         blood pressure ≥ 85&nbsp;mm Hg and/or drug treatment), 2) abdominal obesity (waist circumference ≥ 80&nbsp;cm),
         3) high triglycerides (triglycerides ≥ 1.7&nbsp;mmol/L), 4) low HDL (HDL &lt; 1.3&nbsp;mmol/L),
         and 5) high fasting blood glucose (fasting blood glucose ≥ 6.1&nbsp;mmol/L and/or drug
         treatment).
      
      Assessment of physical activity
      PA was assessed using the modified and locally translated Baecke questionnaire [38,39]. Based on the original Baecke questionnaire that was divided into three parts (work,
         sport and leisure time) [38], a section assessing activities on housework and additional cultural specific leisure
         time activities such as window shopping and playing mahjong (popular activities in
         Hong Kong) were included to make the questionnaire applicable for use in Hong Kong
         Chinese adults of a wide age range. The questions thus consisted of PA at work, in
         doing housework, at leisure time, and in doing sports. For each question, the subject
         had to choose subjectively from four choices: frequently, sometimes, rarely, or never.
         The scores from the four sections were used to derive the work index, housework index,
         leisure time index, and sport index. Summing the four indices result in a continuous
         unweighted total index. A weighted total index was also computed, taking into account
         the different time and activity pattern of workers and housewives. The reference period
         of the questionnaire refers to activities of the last year. Previously we found that
         the weighted total index was significantly correlated with daily energy expenditure
         obtained from the diaries and the total index was not [39]. However, the present results indicated that the distribution of weighted total index
         was skewed and the total index had a higher correlation with MS than the weighted
         total index. Therefore, total index were used as opposed to weighted total index in
         this study.
      
      Assessment of cardiorespiratory fitness
      VO2max was assessed with a symptom-limited maximal exercise test on an electrically braked
         bicycle ergometer (Ergoline 900, Ergoline GmbH, Lindenstrasse, Bitz, Germany). Subjects
         were instructed to abstain from any strenuous exercise on the day before testing.
         Each subject was connected to a calibrated respiratory gas analyzer (Fitmate, COSMED
         Srl, Italy), a portable metabolic analyzer designed for measurement of oxygen consumption
         during exercise via a face mask. It uses a turbine flowmeter for measuring ventilation
         and a galvanic fuel cell oxygen sensor for analyzing oxygen in expired gases, and
         a new sampling technology has been adopted through the use of a small sample of the
         expired volume in a miniaturized dynamic mixing chamber. Though it does not have a
         CO2 analyzer, it ramps the respiratory exchange ratio between 0.8 and 1.2 based on the
         increase in heart rate, thus markedly reduces to minimal error. As reported by Nieman
         and colleagues [40], there were no significant differences in oxygen consumption between the Fitmate
         systems and the Douglas bag system, the ‘gold standard’ for gas exchange measurements,
         during graded treadmill exercise. In the present study, the Fitmate analyzer was calibrated
         before each test. Blood pressure was monitored throughout the exercise test. The test
         started with a 3-min warm up at a workload of 20&nbsp;W and continued with 10&nbsp;W increments
         every minute, until the subject was exhausted or was not able to maintain the required
         pedaling frequency of 50&nbsp;rpm. Subjects were verbally encouraged to reach their maximum.
         The test was terminated when the subject reached VO2max[41,42] or showed any symptoms that indicated termination of exercise based on the guidelines
         of the American College of Sports Medicine [43]. To check the test-retest reliability and the internal consistency of the assessment,
         a separate sample of 50 healthy men and 25 healthy women were invited to undergo a
         repeated VO2max assessment within two weeks after the original assessment period. Paired sample t
         tests indicated that there were no significant mean differences between the two assessments
         (p = 0.051 for men and 0.054 for women). Internal consistency was also adequate with
         Cronbach’s α = 0.95 for men and 0.98 for women.
      
      Other covariates
      Information on a number of covariates was also collected. Marital status, education
         level, occupation, medical history, current use of medications, smoking, and alcohol
         intake were obtained by questionnaire interview. A validated food frequency questionnaire
         containing 60 food items was used to assess dietary intake [44].
      
      Statistical analysis
      Continuous variables are reported as mean and standard deviations, and categorical
         variables as percentages. Student t tests / Chi square tests were performed to compare
         subjects with MS and without MS. Analyses of Covariance (ANCOVA) were also performed
         after adjustment for age. To examine the relative association of PA and CRF with the
         risk of MS, PA and CRF were categorized into tertiles. The lowest tertile of PA (total
         index &lt; 8.6) was designated as inactive and the higher tertiles (2nd–3rd) of PA (total index 8.6–&lt; 9.4 and ≥ 9.4) were grouped together and designated as
         active. Similarly, the lowest tertile of CRF (VO2max &lt; 21.2&nbsp;ml/kg/min) was designated as unfit and the higher tertiles (2nd–3rd) of CRF (VO2max 21.2–&lt; 24.3 and ≥ 24.3&nbsp;ml/kg/min) were grouped together and designated as fit. The
         cut-off scores for the lowest terile of PA/CRF were used as the cut-off scores for
         inactive/active and unfit/fit because the results might provide a reference for the
         minimum PA/CRF level that is associated with lower risk of having MS. Logistic regression
         was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) as an index
         of association of PA and CRF with prevalent MS. Models were adjusted for age, BMI
         and dietary total calories intake. In addition, PA was further adjusted in the models
         for CRF and CRF was further adjusted in the models for PA. The analyses were repeat
         stratified for PA, CRF, and BMI. The combined effects of PA and CRF on MS were also
         examined using logistic regression. For this analysis, four PA–CRF combination categories
         (inactive and unfit; inactive but fit; active but unfit; active and fit) were created
         where the effect of each combination of PA and CRF categories were compared with the
         referent group (inactive and unfit). To test whether metabolically healthy but obese
         subjects have a higher CRF level, subjects were categorized into four groups (metabolically
         healthy and normal weight, metabolically healthy but overweight/obese, metabolically
         unhealthy but normal weight, metabolically abnormal and overweight/obese) on the basis
         of absence or presence of MS and BMI levels of &lt; 23&nbsp;kg/m2 or ≥ 23&nbsp;kg/m2. A cut-off point of a BMI of 23&nbsp;kg/m2 was chosen because it represents the current standard for overweight, as proposed
         by the WHO Western Pacific Regional Office [37]. In this analysis, the waist circumference was excluded as a criterion in the definition
         of MS, since the purpose was to examine the CRF level across metabolic profile regardless
         of their adiposity. Comparisons of CRF level were made between the four categories
         using ANCOVA, with adjustment for age, dietary total calories intake, and PA. Pairwise
         comparisons were adjusted for the Bonferroni correction. All analyses were conducted
         with the Window-based SPSS Statistical Package (version 17.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago,
         IL), and P values less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
      
   

