Methods
   
      Identification of human protein-protein interfaces
      To obtain a set of human protein-protein interfaces, we searched for all the x-ray
         PDB structures containing two or more human protein chains, thus obtaining a set of
         6637 PDB structures. We retained only those chains that could be unambiguously assigned
         to UniProt entries according to SIFTS [46] (about 93% of the total). The SIFTS resource was also used to obtain a residue-level
         mapping between PDB and UniProt sequences. We employed the HotPOINT [47] algorithm to fetch interface residues; some of these residues were classified as
         hot spots by the program, however, since the program has been trained on a set composed
         of only heterodimers, we rely only on the hot spots predicted for this kind of interaction.
         The distance threshold for the identification of the interacting residues was set
         to the default value (two residues belonging to different chains are assumed to interact
         if there is at least one atom from one residue that is at a distance from any atom
         of the second residue at most equal to the sum of Van der Waals radii of the two atoms
         + 0.5Å). To avoid crystallographic artifacts, the search for protein-protein interaction
         interfaces was conducted only on those pairs of protein chains of the Asymmetric Unit
         that were present with the same relative orientation in at least one of the Biological
         Units assigned by the authors of the structure. Among these pairs, 13136 interact
         with at least one pair of residues mapped on the UniProt sequence. We took only the
         interfaces in which both chains interact with at least five residues, thus obtaining
         a set of 11555 dimers. Moreover, we filtered out all the dimers in which the sequence
         of one or both chains does not cover at least 30% of the corresponding UniProt sequence.
      
      Alternative splicing data retrieval
      The genes coding for the interacting proteins were found using Biomart [48] to mine Ensembl cross-references. Out of 1167 distinct proteins, 1113 were unambiguously
         assigned to an ENSG (i.e. an Ensembl gene). Each of them was aligned with all the
         transcripts associated to the corresponding gene using the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm
         [49]. For 1057 proteins it was possible to find one or more ENSTs (i.e. the Ensembl transcripts)
         with identical coding sequence. The remaining proteins were associated to the most
         similar transcripts, provided that there were up to five non-contiguous gaps or substitutions
         (28 proteins did not satisfy this condition). For each of the 1085 proteins that were
         assigned to a transcripts, we took all the other full-length protein-coding ENSTs
         belonging to the same ENSG as alternative splicing isoforms; those transcript that
         are subject to nonsense-mediated decay according to Ensembl were not took into consideration.
         This way we obtained a set of 804 proteins whose genes encode for one or more alternative
         splicing isoforms distinct from the reference protein sequence.
      
      Redundancy reduction
      To perform a clustering of the interfaces and to select one representative for each
         interface, we first grouped together similar proteins using the BLASTClust software
         [50], which is based on BLAST [51]; two proteins were clustered together if they had &gt;= 30% sequence identity over an
         area covering at least 90% of each sequence. The 804 proteins whose genes undergo
         alternative splicing resulted divided into 723 similarity groups. For each group of
         similar sequences, a multiple sequence alignment was performed using T-coffee [52]. These alignments allowed us to compare interfaces from proteins belonging to the
         same similarity group, since each interface residue could be mapped to the multiple
         alignment and identified with its alignment column number. All the heterodimeric semi-interfaces
         of proteins within the same cluster were clustered using a hierarchical complete linkage
         algorithm with distance measure 1 – O, where O is an overlap value defined as the
         number of identical residue identifiers between two semi-interfaces divided by the
         number of residues of the smallest semi-interface. To obtain the clusters, the clustering
         tree was cut at a height equal to 0.5: this way we grouped together semi-interfaces
         with O &gt;= 0.5. This clustering procedure was inspired by a work from Bordner and Gorin
         [53]. A similar method was used to cluster homodimeric interfaces. In this case, O is
         defined as the number of identical residue identifiers between two interfaces divided
         the number of residues of the smallest interface. The numerator can have two different
         values, because one of the two semi-interfaces from one dimer can be compared with
         both the semi-interfaces from the other dimer; for each pairs of interfaces we have
         chosen the combination that maximizes the numerator.
      
      For each cluster we elected a representative (semi-)interface by applying these criteria:
      – Choose the interface associated to the chain that most covers the UniProt sequence
         (in the case of homodimers we use the product of the coverage of the two interacting
         chains);
      
      – If multiple interfaces meet the above criterion, choose among them the interface
         found in the PDB entry with the best resolution;
      
      – If multiple interfaces meet the above criterion, choose among them the interface
         that has the largest number of residues;
      
      – If multiple interfaces remain, choose among them randomly.
      Statistical tests
      In all the employed variants of the statistical analysis of AS-mediated interface
         removal, each isoform was described as a two-bit string, in which to each residue
         of the interacting protein we assigned value 0 if it is found in that isoform, or
         1 if it is missing. We define as “missing stretch” every stretch of contiguous 1 characters,
         which is a contiguous protein region removed by splicing events. A region between
         two missing stretches will be called “non-missing stretch”, while the region that
         spans from the first missing stretch to the last one (or that coincides with the only
         missing stretch) will be referred to as “variable region”. The alignment between the
         transcript coding for the interacting protein and each isoform was done using the
         genomic coordinates of the coding sequences provided by Ensembl.
      
      In the single-isoform test, each control represents a decoy isoform. These controls
         were created by giving each missing or non-missing stretch a new size (number of residues)
         obtained by picking a random value from a Poisson distribution with parameter λ equal
         to the real size of that stretch and choosing randomly the starting position of the
         newly formed variable region (the order of the stretches in the variable region remains
         the same). This way of creating decoys by pulsing missing and non-missing stretches
         allows us to generate a large set of different controls for each isoform without radically
         changing the number, the dimension and the relative position of the alternatively
         spliced regions, and as a consequence the manner in which they can act on the interface.
         Figure&nbsp;4 shows an example of control creation from an isoform with one (a) or two (b) missing
         stretches. After creating 1000 controls for each isoform, we compared the frequency
         at which they lack the binding site with the real frequency of AS-mediated interface
         removal using a CMH test. In this test, for each (semi-)interface/isoform pair, a
         2×2 contingency table is compiled, which describes the variables “isoform” (real or
         decoy) and “interface removal” (interface is removed or not, at a given interface-removal
         threshold). Table&nbsp;1 is an example of contingency table. For each table, the absolute value of the difference
         between the observed and the expected value of one cell, and the deviation between
         observed and expected values are computed. These values, obtained from all the tables,
         are then combined to determine whether the two variables are dependent or not. We
         employed this approach instead of using a chi-square test with a single contingency
         table because in this way controls are compared only with the isoform from which they
         were derived.
      
      Figure 4. Toy examples of control creation for a single-isoform test (A and B) and for an all-isoforms
            test (C). (A) The isoform of an interacting protein for which controls are created is represented
         as a two-bit string, in which 0 describes a conserved position (i.e. not removed by
         a splicing event) and 1 a non-conserved position. A stretch of 1s is called “missing
         stretch” (M.S.) and is coloured in red. In this example the isoform has one missing
         stretch. Controls are created by randomly changing the number of residues (size) of
         the missing stretch according to a Poisson distribution with mean equal to the real
         size of that stretch and randomly selecting the starting point of the stretch. (B) The isoform has two missing stretches and the region between them is called “non-missing
         stretch” and is coloured in blue. The region that encompasses all the missing and
         non-missing stretches is called variable region. Again, controls are created changing
         the size of the missing stretches, but also of the non-missing stretches (N-M.S.)
         and by randomly selecting the starting point of the variable region. (C) A set of isoforms forming an overlap group, i.e. a group in which, for each isoform,
         the missing stretches partially or totally overlap with those of one or more isoforms
         from the same group. All the variable regions in the overlap group are fused into
         an “overlapping variable region” divided into segments by the junctions between missing
         stretches and non-missing stretches or regions outside variable regions, represented
         as pipes in the figure. Each segment's size is randomly changed according to a Poisson
         distribution with mean equal to the segment's size, then the starting point of the
         newly formed overlapping variable region is randomly selected.
      
      Table 1. Example of a 2×2 contingency table computed for an interface/isoform pair in the single-isoform
            test
      In the all-isoforms test, each control consists in a group of decoy isoforms of the
         interacting protein, each one made from one of the real alternative transcripts. In
         this case the overlap between missing stretches of different isoforms has to be maintained:
         this way the extension of the regions of the interacting protein that are alternatively
         spliced does not vary much, the only source of variation being the pulsation of the
         missing stretch. To create a control for a given protein, we first divided the set
         of isoforms of that protein in subgroups called “overlap groups”, such that every
         isoform in an overlap group had at least one missing stretch totally or partially
         overlapping with the missing stretches of one or more isoforms belonging to the same
         group, but not to other groups; each isoform with no overlapping partners was assigned
         to its own single-member overlap group. For each overlap group, an “overlapping variable
         region”, ranging from the minimum starting position to the maximum ending position
         among all the variable regions of the isoforms from that group, was identified. All
         the junctions between a missing and a non missing stretch or between a missing stretch
         and a region outside the overlap group were used to split the corresponding overlapping
         variable region into segments: each segment is a partial or entire missing or non-missing
         stretch that is shared among a specific sub-group of isoforms belonging to the overlap
         group. For each overlap group, the starting position and the size of every segment
         was changed by sampling from a Poisson distribution as previously described for the
         single-isoform test. This process is illustrated in Figure&nbsp;4C. All the newly formed overlapping variable regions were used to create the control
         decoy isoforms, assigning each varied segment to the isoforms from which it derives,
         provided that:
      
      – no pair of overlapping variable regions shows an overlap between segments derived
         from a missing stretch;
      
      – since the previous condition favors the shortening of the missing stretches (shorter
         segments are less likely to overlap), if there are multiple overlap groups, the total
         number of residues in the varied missing exons must not be less than 90% of the total
         size of the real missing exons.
      
      1000 controls were created for each interface. Again, we performed a CMH test, compiling
         for each (semi-)interface a contingency table with variables “alternative splicing”
         (real or control) and “interface removal” (more than a certain fraction of the isoform
         is removed in at least one isoform or not).
      
      To test whether hot spots are more removed or protected than other interface residues,
         a CMH test was performed, assigning to each (semi-)interface/isoform pair a contingency
         table in which the number of hot spot and non-hot spot residues that are removed or
         not were reported.
      
      All the statistical tests were performed using R version 2.14.2 [54].
      
      Assessment of the GO terms enrichment
      For each interface-removal threshold value, we assigned each spliced interface/isoform
         pair a score equal to the fraction of the single-isoform test controls that remove
         the interface, representing how much that interface is exposed to splicing in that
         particular isoform. We then selected all the proteins associated to a score lower
         than 0.5 (i.e. those in which the interface is selectively removed with respect to
         a background of splicing in at least one isoform). The interfaces that are not spliced
         in any isoform were assigned a score equal to the fraction of the all-isoforms test
         controls that remove the interface, and those having a score higher than 0.5 (i.e.
         those proteins whose alternative splicing selectively avoids the binding site) were
         selected. We employed Gorilla [55,56] to evaluate the GO terms enrichment for both lists of proteins (those having selectively
         spliced or selectively protected interfaces) against the proteins data set used in
         the test (heterodimeric or homodimeric). The evaluation of the GO terms enrichment
         was repeated for each value of the interface-removal threshold. Only the GO terms
         for which a False Discovery Rate q-value &lt; 0.05 was obtained were considered as significantly
         enriched. Different cutoff values other than 0.5 were also tested, obtaining similar
         results.
      
      Evaluation of the expression of alternative transcripts
      The tissue-specific expression of the CUL4A transcript variants was retrieved from
         DBATE (Bianchi et al., submitted; URL: http://bioinformatica.uniroma2.it/DBATE/ webcite), an online database of alternative transcripts expression that was developed in
         our laboratory. This database was created processing thirteen RNA-seq panels from
         human tissues gathered from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) service [57] using the Tuxedo suite, which employs Bowtie [58], Cufflinks [59] and TopHat [60], to map the sequence reads to the human genome (hg19 assembly) and to evaluate the
         normalized expression of the Ensembl splicing variants reported in Fragments Per Kilobase
         of transcript per Million mapped reads (FPKM).
      
      Description of additional data files
      The following additional data files are available with the online version of this
         paper. Additional files 1 and 2 are tables listing, respectively, all the heterodimeric semi-interfaces and the homodimeric
         interfaces we analyzed, along with the alternative isoforms and the number of interface
         residues they lack. The Additional file 3 is a set of tables summarizing the results for single-isoform and all-isoforms tests
         performed on both heterodimeric and homodimeric entire binding sites. The Additional
         file 4 is a set of tables summarizing the results of single-isoform and all-isoforms tests
         performed on the hot spot residues of heterodimeric binding sites. Additional files
         5 and 6 are tables listing all the transcripts that selectively lack heterodimeric and homodimeric
         binding sites, respectively.
      
      Additional file 6. Selectively spliced homodimeric interfaces. This table lists the ENSTs of all the transcripts that selectively remove a homodimeric
         interface.
         	Format: XLS 
         	Size: 34KB Download file or  display content in a new windowThis file can be viewed with: Microsoft Excel Viewer
   

