Methods
   
      Epidemiological and environmental investigations were conducted at the apartment complex,
         which consisted of four adjacent buildings. Two buildings were built in 2004; the
         third and fourth buildings were built in 2006 and 2009, respectively. Occupancy of
         the buildings began soon after construction of each was complete. An age of 62&nbsp;years
         or older was required for residency. Single residents occupied most (&gt;90%) of the
         340 apartment units at the complex and virtually all units were occupied by October,
         2009. Common areas were available to residents (e.g., communal kitchens, laundry facilities,
         and public restrooms). Medical services were not available onsite, but communal meals
         and social gatherings occurred regularly.
      
      For case finding, we defined confirmed cases of LD as a diagnosis of clinical or radiographic
         pneumonia and laboratory-confirmation of LD (i.e., urine antigen testing, culture
         identification of Legionella from respiratory secretions, or a four-fold increase in serum antibody titer to L. pneumophila serogroup 1) between August 1, 2009 and December 31, 2009 among a resident of any
         apartment building in the complex. Possible cases were defined similarly, but had
         either incomplete (i.e., a single Legionella titer) or no specific laboratory testing for Legionella infection performed. Respiratory illnesses in persons with negative Legionella testing were considered non-cases.
      
      We initiated enhanced surveillance for LD using four strategies. First, we sent email
         alerts to local hospital infection preventionists to inform them of the outbreak,
         encourage Legionella-specific laboratory testing in patients with community-acquired pneumonia, and remind
         them to report LD cases. Second, we requested lists of all laboratory-confirmed cases
         of LD since August 1 from the city’s 12 largest hospitals. Third, we developed a decision
         algorithm (Figure&nbsp;1) to identify suspect cases and standardize case classification. During the cohort
         study (described below), we queried residents for three symptoms (fever, cough and
         shortness of breath) since August 1, 2009. If the resident had any two of these symptoms,
         a standardized interview followed. We offered urine antigen testing to individuals
         with suspected pneumonia who had not had Legionella-specific testing; tests were conducted at the Maryland Department of Health and Mental
         Hygiene’s public health laboratory. Two investigator-physicians reviewed and classified
         medical records of patients with suspected LD using a standardized data abstraction
         instrument. Fourth, residents' death certificates were also reviewed for diagnoses
         of “pneumonia” and “Legionnaires’ disease”.
      
      Figure 1. Decision algorithm for Legionnaire’s disease case-finding and classification. * The decision courses based on interview data (left) and medical records (right)
         are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Information for some subjects was gathered
         in both tracts. † Data from patient interview. ‡ Data from medical records review § Suspect cases: a resident identified by case-finding who has entered the decision
         algorithm because his/her illness is to be evaluated as a case of Legionnaire’s disease;
         resident’s illness remains a suspect case until further categorized. ¶ Physicians reviewed available medical records for signs, symptoms, and diagnostic
         testing (e.g., chest x-ray) to determine if subject possibly had pneumonia consistent
         with Legionnaire’s disease. # Possible case: a subject whose illness has met all the criteria of a suspect case
         is labeled a possible case while outstanding information or testing is collected.
      
      To estimate attack rates and identify transmission routes, we conducted a retrospective
         cohort study among all 171 residents of the two affected buildings where LD cases
         had occurred (A-1 and A-2). The exposure period for the study was defined as August
         1 through the date of survey interview. After informed consent was obtained, a standardized
         questionnaire was administered in person. We queried respondents about their demographic
         characteristics, water exposures at the complex and within the community, signs or
         symptoms of respiratory illness, healthcare use and diagnoses, smoking, and comorbid
         conditions (asthma; chronic lung, kidney, and liver disease; diabetes mellitus; heart
         disease or congestive heart failure; plus, immunocomprising conditions, including
         cancer, immunosuppressive therapies, human immunodeficiency virus infection, and organ
         transplant). Complaints about municipal water service interruptions and water quality
         (i.e., taste, smell, and appearance) were also recorded. We made at least two attempts
         on separate days to interview each resident; visitors were not included in the cohort
         study.
      
      We maintained data in a Microsoft Access database (Microsoft Corp, Redmond, WA) and analyzed it in SAS version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC). Attack rates (AR) for specific transmission
         risk factors (present vs. absent) were compared to calculate relative risks (RR) with
         95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) and Fisher’s exact tests. A p-value less than 0.10
         was considered statistically significant because of the small number of LD cases.
      
      Our environmental investigation began with a physical inspection, noting the orientation
         of the apartment buildings, the design of the individual apartment units, and points
         of water use (e.g., showerheads, sink faucets) in each unit. Common areas where water
         exposures might have occurred were also noted. Diagrams of the potable water system
         were not available at this stage of the investigation.
      
      On October 17, we collected 103 samples from five apartments of LD patients in affected
         buildings (A-1 and A-2) and three randomly-selected apartments of residents who had
         not developed LD in A-2 and each unaffected buildings (U-1 and U-2). (A resident of
         a randomly-selected apartment in A-1 developed LD after the apartment was sampled.)
         Specific sampling locations in the apartments included showerheads, sink faucets in
         kitchens and bathrooms, and water heater tanks (n = 56 samples). We also collected
         samples from outdoor fire hydrants (n = 6), from the buildings’ water intake valves
         (n = 19), and the sink faucets and water heating tanks of common areas in buildings
         A-1 and A-2 (n = 22). We collected samples of municipal water and expansion tanks,
         designed to absorb excess water pressure caused by thermal expansion or “water hammers”
         (i.e., water pressure surges), on October 21 and October 24, respectively. Biofilm
         swabs and one-liter bulk water samples were collected according to published procedures
         [12]. Water temperatures and free chlorine concentrations (using N,N-diethyl-P-phenylenediamine
         reagents) were measured in potable water systems during this sampling.
      
      At the CDC Legionella laboratory, bulk water samples were filtered through polycarbonate 0.2&nbsp;μm filters.
         The filters were placed in 5&nbsp;ml of sterile water and vortexed for 60&nbsp;seconds. One
         hundred μl of this suspension were placed on buffered charcoal-yeast extract media
         with and without antibiotics. Plates were incubated at 95–98.6°F (35–37°C) in 2.5%
         CO2 to culture Legionella. We also forwarded two patients’ clinical isolates to CDC.
      
      Serogrouping and determination of monoclonal antibody patterns [13,14] were performed on all isolates. In addition, sequence-based typing was used to create
         seven-gene profiles (flaA, pilE, asd, mip, mompS, proA, and neuA) of the clinical
         isolates and select environmental isolates [15-17]. Sequence-based typing results were compared for clinical and environmental isolates
         to determine the source of the outbreak strain in the environment.
      
      This study was determined an emergency public health investigation exempt from institutional
         review board (IRB) review; standard procedures to protect patient confidentiality
         were followed.
      
   

